J Appl Physiol 98: 31–39, 2005;
doi:10.1152/japplphysiol.00759.2004. Historical Perspective

Robert Boyle’s landmark book of 1660 with the first experiments
on rarified air

John B. West
Department of Medicine, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, California

West, John B. Robert Boyle’s landmark book of 1660 with the first experiments
on rarified air. J Appl Physiol 98: 31–39, 2005; doi:10.1152/japplphysiol.00759.
2004.—In 1660, Robert Boyle (1627–1691) published his landmark book New
Experiments Physico-Mechanicall, Touching the Spring of the Air, and its Effects
. . . in which he described the first controlled experiments of the effects of reducing
the pressure of the air. Critical to this work was the development of an air pump by
Boyle with Robert Hooke (1635–1703). For the first time, it was possible to observe
physical and physiological processes at both normal and reduced barometric
pressures. The air pump was described in detail, although the exact design of the
critical piston is unclear. Boyle reported 43 separate experiments, which can
conveniently be divided into 7 groups. The first experiments were on the “spring of
the air,” that is the pressure developed by the air when its volume was changed.
Several experiments described the behavior of the barometer invented by Torricelli
just 16 years before when it was introduced into the low-pressure chamber. The
behavior of burning candles was discussed, although this emphasized early mis-
understandings of the nature of combustion. There were some physiological
observations, although these were later extended by Boyle and Hooke. The effects
of the low pressure on such diverse physical phenomena as magnetism, sound
propagation, behavior of a pendulum, evolution of gases from liquids, and the
behavior of smoke were described. This classic book is brimming with enthusiasm
and fresh ideas even for today and deserves to be better known.

air pump; vacuum; mercury barometer; pressure-volume behavior; respiration;
combustion

IN THE HISTORY OF THE PHYSIOLOGY of high altitude, Paul Bert’s THE SETTING
book La Pression Barométrique (2) stands out as a watershed It is interesting to trace the events leading up to the work
contribution. This contained the first definitive demonstration described in Boyle’s book partly because of the great rapidity
that the deleterious effects of high altitude were due to the low of progress over a period of less than 20 years. The crucial
partial pressure of oxygen, whether this was caused by a breakthrough was made by Evangelista Torricelli (1608–
reduction of barometric pressure or a reduced oxygen concen- 1647), who in 1643 invented the mercury barometer. He took
tration at normal pressure. As a result, Bert is often rightly a long glass tube, which was closed at one end, filled this with
referred to as the father of high-altitude physiology. mercury, put his thumb over the open end, and inverted the

However, some 200 years before the publication of La tube in a dish of mercury. The level of the mercury in the tube
Pression Barométrique, there was another landmark book in fell to 76 cm, and the nature of the space above it, which we
high-altitude studies. The author was Robert Boyle (1627– now know as a vacuum, was a topic of great controversy.
1691) and the full title was New Experiments Physico- Torricelli recognized that the column of mercury was sup-
Mechanicall, Touching the Spring of the Air, and its Effects ported by the pressure of the atmosphere acting on the surface
(Made, for the Most Part, in a New Pneumatical Engine) of the mercury in the dish, and in his letter to Michelangelo
Written by Way of Letter to the Right Honorable Charles Ricci in 1644 he made the dramatic statement that “We live
Lord Vicount of Dungarvan, Eldest Son to the Earl of Corke submerged at the bottom of an ocean of the element air, that by
(3). The importance of this book was that it described the unquestioned experiments is known to have weight” (19). This
first controlled experiments of the effects of reducing the concept was a major breakthrough in an area that had caused
pressure of the air. The book was not limited to physiology, much confusion in the past, and, for example, even the great
and in fact this topic occupied only a small portion of the Galileo only some 6 years before was confused about the
text. But the book was so innovative and stimulating, and reason why a suction pump could only raise water 9 m. The
such a joy to read, that it deserves to be better known by explanation he gave was related to the presumed tensile
physiologists. strength of water (14).

Torricelli’s simple but dramatic experiment resulted in a
flurry of activity over the next 16 years. In 1648, Blaise Pascal

Address for reprint requests and other correspondence: J. B. West, UCSD
Dept. of Medicine 0623A, 9500 Gilman Dr., La Jolla, CA 92093-0623 (E-mail: (1623–1662) persuaded his brother-in-law Florin Perier to take
jwest@ucsd.edu). a Torricellian barometer up the Puy de Dôme outside Clermont

http://www. jap.org 8750-7587/05 $8.00 Copyright © 2005 the American Physiological Society 31

Downloaded from journals.physiology.org/journal/jappl (079.026.005.098) on November 19, 2020.



Historical Perspective
32 ROBERT BOYLE’S EXPERIMENTS

in the center of France, and, as expected, the level of the
mercury fell because, on the top of the hill, the pressure of the
atmosphere was less. A major advance was then made in 1654
by Otto von Guericke (1602–1686) when he constructed an air
pump and demonstrated to the Diet of Regensburg that it was
possible to reduce the amount of air in a glass vessel. However,
his most famous experiment took place in 1657 when two
metal hemispheres were constructed so that they fitted accu-
rately with an airtight seal. When the air was pumped out of
these, two teams of eight horses each were unable to break the
seal. This was a very colorful demonstration of the enormous
force that could be developed by atmospheric pressure.

Boyle learned of Guericke’s experiments from a book writ-
ten by Gaspar Schott in 1657 (17), but he soon realized that
Guericke’s apparatus had two serious deficiencies. The most
important was that the hollow vessel that was evacuated could
not easily be opened, and therefore it was impossible to put
anything inside it. Because Boyle intended to compare the
behavior of various processes both in rarified and normal air,
this design was inadequate. Another problem was that Gue-
ricke’s pump was so inefficient that it required “the continual
labour of two strong men for divers hours.” Boyle obviously
wanted something more convenient than this.

As indicated above, the book by Schott was published in
1657, but by early 1659 Boyle had a much-improved air pump
and was ready for experiments. The pump was designed and
constructed by Robert Hooke (1635–1703), who was a me-
chanical genius. He made important contributions to an ex-
tremely wide field, including microscopy, horology, mechan-
ics, and architecture. Boyle hardly mentioned Hooke in the
1660 book, but later he acknowledged the great contributions
of his assistant. In fact, it seems likely that a number of the
experiments described in the 1660 book owed their origin to

Fig. 1. Portrait of Robert Boyle (1627–1691). Reproduced from Ref. 18.
Hooke’s interests. An example was experiment 26 on the effect
of rarified air on the swing of a pendulum, since the motion of
a pendulum was one of Hooke’s many interests. Boyle finished
writing the book on December 20, 1659, and it was published here is arguably his best, but there were several sequels to this,
in 1660. Therefore, it was only 16 years between Torricelli’s and in addition Boyle wrote extensively on theology, ethics,
seminal discovery of the barometer and Boyle’s completion of philosophy, and chemistry.
this remarkable book. The prodigious literary output of Boyle occurred despite

tremendous political and social upheaval in England. There
was a civil war from 1642 until 1646 with continuing unrest

THE MAN after that until King Charles I was beheaded in 1649. The
The Honourable Robert Boyle (Fig. 1) was one of the most Commonwealth that followed under Oliver Cromwell was also

important figures in the history of science in the middle of the an unsettling period, and when Cromwell died in 1658 and was
17th century and not surprisingly has been the subject of succeeded by his son Richard, there was even more unrest. The
extensive studies. This is therefore only a brief summary of his monarchy was restored with Charles II in 1660. Boyle refers to
career. Robert Boyle was the 14th son of the first Earl of Cork, these difficulties in his preface, where he states “I need not
a man with extensive landholdings in Ireland. As a conse- perhaps represent to the equitable Reader, how much these
quence, Robert was wealthy and lived the life of a 17th-century strange Confusions of this unhappy Nation, in the midst of
gentleman. He was initially educated at home by tutors and which I have made and written these Experiments, are apt to
then at Eton College. After spending some time on the Conti- disturb that calmness of Minde, and undistractedness of
nent, during which he met Galileo in Florence in 1641–1642, Thoughts, that are wont to be requisite to Happy Speculations.”
he returned to England and lived in London. He was one of a THE BOOK
circle of friends who discussed contemporary scientific issues,
and Boyle referred to the group as the “invisible college.” This The title page is shown in Fig. 2. This is followed by an
later became the Royal Society in 1662. Boyle moved to 11-page preface in which Boyle gave some of his reasons for
Oxford in 1654, taking a house next to University College, the style of the book. An interesting feature is the extent to
where a plaque on the wall can still be found. which he emphasized that he did all the experiments himself

Boyle was a prolific writer, and even now some of his (albeit with the help of Hooke). The experiments were de-
material remains unpublished (16). His 1660 book discussed scribed in considerable detail so that readers could reproduce

J Appl Physiol • VOL 98 • JANUARY 2005 • www.jap.org

Downloaded from journals.physiology.org/journal/jappl (079.026.005.098) on November 19, 2020.



Historical Perspective
ROBERT BOYLE’S EXPERIMENTS 33

pected difficulties we found to keep out the externall Air, even
for a little while, when some considerable part of the internal
had been suckt out; You would peradventure allow, that I
might have set down more circumstances than I have.” This
little conceit of imagining that he is talking directly to his
nephew is somewhat like the format Galileo used in his book
referred to above (14) in which the whole of the scientific
thesis was given in the form of a dialogue between two people.

After Boyle’s preface titled “To the Reader,” there is another
brief introduction headed “Friendly Reader,” but this was
written by the editor of the book, Robert Sharrock (1630–
1684), who took Boyle’s presumably handwritten manuscript
and prepared it for publication. At the same time, he prepared
a Latin edition because, as he said, “Since the Mountain cannot
come to Mohamet, Mohamet will go to the Mountain.” By this,
he meant that many scientists outside England wanted to read
the book but could not understand English. Latin was still the
lingua franca of the intelligentsia of the civilized world.

The next section of the book is an expanded table of contents
under the heading “A Summary of the chief Matters treated of
in this Epistolical Discourse.” Boyle explained that the book
begins with a “Praemium,” an old term for an introduction, that
is devoted to a description of the pump. This is followed by
brief descriptions of the 43 experiments in the book and a short
conclusion at the end.1

It should be added here that this 1660 edition does not
include what we now know as Boyle’s Law, that is the inverse
relationship between the volume of a gas and its pressure (20).
This was added in the second edition of 1662, as described
later.

Fig. 2. Title page of the 1660 book.

THE PUMP
them if they wished. For example, on the second page of the
preface, which is headed “To the Reader,” Boyle stated, “On The first 19 pages of the book describe the air pump in
my being somewhat prolix in many of my Experiments, I have considerable detail. The description in the text is made much
these Reasons to render, That some of them being altogether clearer by the fine engraving of the pump shown in Fig. 3. A
new, seem to need the being circumstantially related, to keep modern reconstruction of the pump is shown in Fig. 4.
the Reader from distrusting them.” It might seem strange to the Boyle divided the description into two parts. The first is the
present-day reader that Boyle put so much emphasis on the fact glass “receiver” on the top in which the partial vacuum was
that all the experiments were actually carried out. However, a developed and in which the experiments were carried out. The
number of books before this contained a mixture of actual and most striking feature of this is its great size. Boyle stated that
“thought” or imaginary experiments. As an example, Galileo in it contained 30 wine quarts, each of them containing “near 2
his great book Dialogues Concerning Two New Sciences (14) pound of water.” In modern units, this is a volume of 28
discussed how the force or resistance of a vacuum could be liters, which, if the receiver were spherical, would mean a
measured. He described how a piston could be made to fit diameter of 38 cm. This is the size of the receiver in two
perfectly in an inverted cylinder filled with water with all the modern reconstructions.2 In fact, Boyle wanted a larger re-
air excluded. When weights were added to the piston until it ceiver, stating “We should have been better pleas’d with a
fell, the force of the vacuum could be derived. However, this is more capacious Vessel, but the Glass-men professed them-
not an experiment in the sense we now use the term, but an selves unable to blow a larger, of such a thickness and shape as
imaginary situation that Galileo developed to explain a con-
cept. Boyle was at great pains to emphasize that his experi- 1 The whole book is available on the web from Early English Books Online
ments were actually done, and in fact some of the detail is (http://eebo.chadwyck.com/). This needs a subscription for access, but the
rather tedious. online version is an accurate facsimile of the 1660 edition. A second edition,

Another issue briefly referred to in the preface is why the published in 1662 with some additional material, is available from Books on
Demand (UMI, Ann Arbor, MI). The contents of the text are identical but the

book was written in the form of a letter to Boyle’s nephew. In pagination is different. The 1660 book is also reprinted in volume 1 of The
fact, throughout the book, there are numerous allusions to the Works of Robert Boyle (16). This is the easiest version to read.
recipient of the letter, which allowed Boyle to emphasize 2 There are at least two full-size modern reconstructions of the Boyle-Hooke
important points. For example, on page 17, after describing the pump. One is in the Museum of the History of Science in Oxford, UK, and the

construction of the pump, Boyle writes “Your Lordship will, other is in the Science Museum, Kensington, London, UK. Neither are
probably on display but can be seen by appointment. Both are well worth a

perhaps, think that I have been unnecessarily prolix in this first visit partly because they emphasize the great size of the pump and particularly
part of my Discourse: But if you had seen how many unex- the receiver.

J Appl Physiol • VOL 98 • JANUARY 2005 • www.jap.org

Downloaded from journals.physiology.org/journal/jappl (079.026.005.098) on November 19, 2020.



Historical Perspective
34 ROBERT BOYLE’S EXPERIMENTS

Fig. 3. Engraving of the air pump devised by
Robert Boyle and Robert Hooke (1635–1703).
The complete pump is shown at center, and
some of the disassembled parts are at right.
Various small pieces of equipment that were
used in the experiments are also shown. See text
for details.

was requisite to our purpose.” Boyle apparently recognized the orifice was closed with a brass ring that was cemented in place.
enormous compressing force that would be developed on the The brass ring had a smaller hole in it 0.5 in. in diameter
receiver when the air pressure was reduced and of course an through which smaller objects could be introduced into the
implosion could have been disastrous. In fact, in one of the receiver. This hole was closed with a ground brass stopper,
experiments, a glass vial containing air at normal pressure which could be rotated so that a string attached to the bottom
exploded and cracked the receiver. could control equipment in the receiver. In addition, this

At the top of the receiver, there was a round hole 4 in. in stopper could be easily removed and replaced. By contrast, the
diameter with a lip of glass almost 1 in. high. This allowed 4-in. brass ring had to be re-cemented every time it was
relatively large objects to be introduced into the receiver. The removed. Incidentally, Boyle makes occasional comments that

J Appl Physiol • VOL 98 • JANUARY 2005 • www.jap.org

Downloaded from journals.physiology.org/journal/jappl (079.026.005.098) on November 19, 2020.



Historical Perspective
ROBERT BOYLE’S EXPERIMENTS 35

consisted of two parts, one (marked 44 just above the rack in
Fig. 3) “somewhat less in Diameter than the cavity of the
cylindre, upon which is nail’d a good thick piece of tan’d shoe
Leather, which will go so close to the Cylindre, that it will need
to be very forcibly knock’d and ram’d in, if at any time it be
taken out.” It is not clear from this description exactly how the
piston is constructed. Presumably, the first part (44) is made of
wood to accept the nails, but where the thick piece of leather
was placed is uncertain. Conant (12) in his discussion of the
pump shows the leather seal as nailed to the upper side of the
wooden piece, but this would not work well to form an airtight
seal as the piston was pulled down because the leather would
rise up at the periphery. Much better would be to place the
leather on the bottom of the wooden piston. This is the
arrangement used in reverse in modern bicycle pumps. The
reconstruction of the pump in the Science Museum in London
interpreted Boyle’s description differently, and there the strip
of leather is nailed around the periphery of the wooden piston.
It is uncharacteristic of Boyle to be so vague about this
critically important element of the pump because, of course,
the ability of the pump to reduce the pressure in the receiver
depended critically on the fit of the piston in the cylinder.

The piston was pulled down using a rack and pinion, which
is clear from the engraving. Finally, the cylinder had a small
valve at the top consisting of a tapered hole with a well-fitting
brass plug that could be easily removed. To operate the pump,
the stopcock at the base of the receiver was closed, the plug
valve was opened, and the piston was cranked to the top of the
cylinder. Then the plug valve was closed, the stopcock was
opened, and the piston was cranked down. This process was
then repeated as necessary. In some experiments, for example

Fig. 4. Modern reconstruction of the air pump in the Museum of the History experiment 37, the piston was drawn down before the stopcock
of Science, Oxford, UK. Reproduced by permission. Photographed by the
author. was opened.

At the end of this description of the pump, Boyle apologized
to his nephew, stating that the description may seem to be

the design could be improved, and at this point he suggests that unnecessarily prolix. However, he then went on to say that he
a better design for the 4-in. hole would be a ground glass taper included many details because of the great difficulty of getting
“in case your Lordship should have such another Engine made the pump to perform satisfactorily. He had many problems
for you.” with air leaks through the cement at the top and bottom of the

At the bottom of the receiver was a brass stopcock similar to receiver, and we can assume that the fit of the piston in the
designs used today. The connection between the stopcock and cylinder was always a serious problem. To reduce leaks, he
the receiver was a challenge. The solution was to form a piece poured into the top of the receiver a little “sallad oyl” to make
of “tin” with a conical shape and fill the space between the tin the stopcock more airtight. Also a “pretty store of oyl” was
and the receiver with cement made of pitch, resin, and wood poured into the cylinder to lubricate the piston. Interesting (and
ashes “well incorporated.” To prevent the cement from plug- surprising to Boyle) was the fact that adding some water to the
ging the hole in the receiver during this process, a cork was oil improved the operation of the pump.
placed in the hole and withdrawn through the top of the Because of the problem of leaks and the resulting loss of the
receiver with a string after the cement had set. Modern glass- vacuum in a relatively short time, Boyle divided possible
makers are able to form the glass to fit the stopcock, and in fact experiments into two types. The first was those that could be
this is what was done in the modern reconstruction at the carried out in a short time, and the book concentrates on this
Museum of the History of Science, Oxford, UK (Fig. 4). group. The second type of experiment, such as studies of the

The second part of the pump was the hollow cylinder preservation of animal or other bodies in a vacuum, or the
together with the piston, which was driven by a rack and germination and growth of vegetables, required a sustained
pinion. The cylinder was a piece of cast brass about 14 in. long partial vacuum over a long period of time, and Boyle conceded
with a hole 3 in. in diameter bored within it. Machining a hole that his pump could not provide this.
of accurate constant diameter would have been a challenge, but Despite these imperfections, the pump was a major techno-
boring large holes in metal was a well-known skill in making logical and engineering advance. As such, it owed much to the
cannons. ingenuity of Hooke. The result was that, for the first time, it

One of the most critical parts of the pump was the piston or was possible to subject various materials and processes to a
“sucker” as Boyle referred to it. Unfortunately, the description partial vacuum while setting up an identical control experiment
is less detailed than we would like. Boyle simply says that it in the air alongside the pump. Alternatively, the experiment

J Appl Physiol • VOL 98 • JANUARY 2005 • www.jap.org

Downloaded from journals.physiology.org/journal/jappl (079.026.005.098) on November 19, 2020.



Historical Perspective
36 ROBERT BOYLE’S EXPERIMENTS

could be performed in the receiver at normal atmospheric the weight of the air. Here, he was echoing Torricelli’s state-
pressure and again when the air was removed. Boyle himself ment cited earlier. Boyle described how it was possible to
was quite aware of how innovative all this was, and the demonstrate that air has weight by weighing a dry lamb’s
modern-day reader of the 1660 book senses the excitement and bladder containing air which was compressed by tying thread
novelty of it. around it, and comparing this with the weight of the empty

How successful was the pump in developing a partial vac- bladder when the air was removed by pricking holes in the
uum? As we shall see in experiments 17–19, Boyle reported bladder. Then, based on the density of air and the pressure at
that the level of mercury in a Torricellian barometer could be the surface of the Earth, he referred to calculations by others
brought down to 1 in. above the surface of the mercury trough, that the atmosphere must be at least 50 miles high in some
indicating that the pressure had been reduced to 3% of its places.
normal value (corresponding to an altitude of 23 km). Again, Another demonstration of the spring of the air in the daily
in experiment 33, Boyle pumped down to a good vacuum and operation of his pump was that if the piston was drawn down
found that it then required 150 lbs. of weight on the piston to with the stopcock closed, it was extremely difficult to remove
pull it down. If we take the diameter of the piston as 3 in., this the small valve at the top of the cylinder. In fact, he stated that
represents essentially full atmospheric pressure. people who tried to remove the valve under these conditions

were led to believe that there was some large weight attached
THE EXPERIMENTS to the bottom of it.

A further way of demonstrating the spring of the air was to
As indicated above, Boyle reported 43 separate experiments take a lamb’s bladder about half full of air, secured at the neck

(13, 16). However, some of these are clearly related, and it is with a string, and place it in the receiver, which was then
convenient for us to divide them into seven groups. Because evacuated. The volume of the bladder increased dramatically
the work was done nearly 350 years ago, it is not surprising but returned to its former volume when the pressure in the
that some experiments are more interesting than others. In receiver was returned to normal. A similar experiment had
particular, physiology was in its infancy in 1660, and the been performed by Gilles de Roberval (1602–1675) using a
experiments reported here precede the important studies of calf bladder exposed to low pressure by means of a Torricellian
Boyle himself and those of Hooke, Lower, and Mayow later in barometer. In fact, Boyle reported that he was able to distend
the century. It should be remembered that Boyle’s book ap- the bladder until it ruptured with a “great report, almost like a
peared only 32 years after William Harvey’s groundbreaking Craker.” He also showed that a partially distended bladder
De Motu Cordis (15), which ushered in a revolution in phys- increased its volume greatly if it was held near a fire, and he
iology. Interestingly, Boyle was one of Harvey’s patients suggested that this might be because of increased “Agitation of
because of his weak eyes. the Aërial Particles.” Again, this explanation is consistent with

Spring of the air (experiments 1–9, 32, 33, and 36). Boyle the modern kinetic theory of gases.
began his account of the experiments by discussing some of the In experiment 9, Boyle described how he took a glass vial
most obvious properties of the air based on everyday use of his (spelled viol in the book) partly filled with water but with the
“pneumatical engine” or pump. He wrote, “I hold it not unfit to neck closed by means of a glass pipe that was cemented in (this
begin with what does constantly and regularly offer it self to is the small container marked fig. 14 in Fig. 3 just to the right
our observation, as depending upon the Fabrick of the Engine of the center of the wooden stand). At the very first descent of
it self, and not upon the nature of this or that particular the piston, a piece of glass flew out of the vial striking the
Experiment which ’tis employed to try.” He then described receiver and cracking it in many places. Boyle was surprised
how the force necessary to pull down the piston became greater that this glass vessel exploded while others made of thin glass
with successive strokes as the amount of air in the receiver was remained intact when the pressure in the receiver was reduced.
reduced. He attributed this to the fact that “the Particles of the He surmised that differences in the quality of the glass and the
remaining Air, having more room to extend themselves in, will shape of the containers might be responsible. Boyle also
less press out one another.” Therefore, the pressure of the observed wryly that receivers “are more easily crack’d then
normal outside air resisted the downward action of the plunger procur’d” and described ways of cementing cracks in the
more. He noted that if the air in the receiver was greatly rarified receiver with plaster so that it could continue to be used.
and the stopcock was opened, the piston was forcibly carried to Torricellian experiments (experiments 17–19). Boyle used
the top of the cylinder. this term to describe experiments in which he studied the effect

Boyle then has a short digression on what he believed was of reducing the pressure around the mercury in the dish of a
the mechanical basis of the spring of the air. He likened air to barometer described by Torricelli. He made it clear that these
a fleece of wool that can be greatly compressed, but if the experiments were some of the most important that he planned
compressing force is removed, it expands rapidly. He com- for his pneumatical engine, and he began his account of
pared this explanation with that given by Rene Descartes experiment 17 as follows: “Proceed we now to the mention of
(1596–1650), who had an alternative hypothesis, i.e., that the that Experiment, whereof the satisfactory tryal was the princi-
air consisted of particles in restless agitation so that each pal Fruit I promis’d my self from our Engine. . . . I considered
corpuscle endeavored to beat off all others coming close to it. that, if the true and onlye reason while the Quick-silver falls no
This is similar to the modern concept of the kinetic theory of lower, be, that at the Altitude the Mercurial Cylinder in the
gases. Boyle did not choose one model over another, although Tube, is in Aequilibrium with the Cylinder of Air, supposed to
he thought that the first was easier to understand. reach from the adjacent Mercury to the top of the Atmosphere:

Boyle then argued that the spring of the air is related to its then if this Experiment could be try’d out of the Atmosphere,
pressure, which is high near the surface of the Earth because of the Quick-silver in the Tube would fall down to a levell with

J Appl Physiol • VOL 98 • JANUARY 2005 • www.jap.org

Downloaded from journals.physiology.org/journal/jappl (079.026.005.098) on November 19, 2020.



Historical Perspective
ROBERT BOYLE’S EXPERIMENTS 37

that in the Vessel, since then there would be no pressure on the matches, and even a pistol containing gun powder! Boyle’s
Subjacent, to resist the weight of the Incumbent Mercury.” interpretation of why these flammable materials went out when
Accordingly, Boyle arranged to have the mercury dish of a the air was rarified emphasizes the early state of knowledge in
Torricellian barometer placed in his receiver while the tube of 1660. For example, he expected the fire to burn more brightly
the barometer passed up through the hole at the top, which was when the air was removed because this would allow greater
carefully sealed with cement. space for the products of combustion. He stated it thus:

When the pressure in the receiver was reduced by cranking “Whereby it seem’d to appear that the drawing away of the
down the piston, Boyle was very satisfied to see that the level ambient Air made the Fire go out sooner than otherwise it
of the mercury in the barometer tube fell. By hard pumping, it would have done; though that part of the Air that we drew out
was possible to reduce the height of the column of mercury to left the more room for the stifling steams of the Coals to be
1 in., but despite laborious pumping the level would go no received into.” Of course Boyle knew nothing about oxygen at
lower. Boyle attributed this to the fact that it was impossible to this time; Priestley was not to isolate it until over 100 years
prevent small leaks of outside air into the receiver particularly later. In the experiment with the pistol, Boyle found that the
through the cement that was used in several places. Inciden- force of the flintlock was not apparently altered, and that sparks
tally, Boyle was obviously very pleased with this experiment were produced just as in air at normal pressure. However, the
and repeated it in the presence of three friends, “Famous gunpowder was not ignited in most of the experiments, al-
Mathematick Professors, Dr. Wallace, Dr. Ward and Mr. though in one the flame appeared to expand more than ex-
Wren.” This is the same Christopher Wren who built St. Paul’s pected in normal air. Boyle also attempted to ignite combus-
Cathedral in London and was involved in many scientific tible material within the receiver by concentrating the sun’s
discussions. rays with a burning glass and succeeded in making smoke, but

Boyle noted that the extent to which the barometer level fell the results of these experiments were unsatisfactory he said
with the first descent of the piston was greater than with because the thickness of the glass of the receiver impeded the
subsequent pumpings, and he correctly surmised that, as the sun’s rays.
pressure of the air in the receiver fell, less of it could be Physiological observations (experiments 40 and 41). As
removed with each exsuction, as he called it. In fact, he argued indicated earlier, measurements on animals form only a small
that if one knew the volume of the receiver and the displaced part of the book. Probably one of the main reasons for this was
volume of the piston in the pump, it should be possible to that Boyle was so intrigued by the physical consequences of
calculate the extent to which the mercury fell. Here, he was rarifying air that studies of living things took second place. He
close to describing Boyle’s Law, that is the inverse relationship subsequently wrote other books and articles that included some
between volume and pressure, but this was not done in the
1660 book. Instead, it was part of an addendum to the second physiology including “New experiments concerning the rela-
edition of the book published in 1662, when he responded to tionship between light and air (in shining wood and fish)” (7),
various criticisms of his work, particularly one by Franciscus “New pneumatical observations upon respiration” (9), Spring
Linus (20). Boyle also carried out the opposite experiment in of the Air, First Continuation (8), and Spring of the Air, Second
which he raised the pressure inside the receiver with the pump Continuation (10).
and noted that the level of the mercury in the Torricellian In experiment 40, Boyle studied the behavior of winged
barometer rose. insects in his receiver as he removed the air. A large fly was

At this point, Boyle has a digression in which he describes introduced, and it dropped down from the side of the receiver
variations in the height of the mercury in his Torricellian where it was walking when the pressure was reduced. A bee
barometer when it was set up by the window of his bedroom so fell down from a flower within the receiver when the pressure
that he could observe it over a long period of time. He states was lowered, although Boyle was unclear whether this was
that, over a period of 5 wk, the height of the mercury varied because the air was too rarified for it to fly, or whether it was
by 2 in., although, interestingly, he thought it fell in warm weakened by the low pressure. In a footnote, he mentions that
weather and rose in cold weather. He was not able to explain a white butterfly at first fluttered up and down but after the
the variations in height, although he wondered whether the pressure was reduced it “fell down as in a swoon, retaining no
phases of the moon and the tides had some effect. He also other motion then some little trembling of the Wings.”
made a few experiments with a water-filled barometer and These observations led to a much longer account in exper-
noted that it was impossible to reduce the level of this below iment 41 on studies on the nature of respiration. A lark was
1 ft. above the surface of the water in the trough, and he placed in the receiver and sprang to a good height on several
recognized that this was because of the much lower density of occasions when the pressure was normal. But when air was
water than mercury. removed, it began to “droop and appear sick, and very soon

Burning of candles and other substances (experiments 10– after was taken with as violent and irregular Convulsions as are
15). When Boyle placed an ordinary tallow candle in the wont to be observ’d in Poultry, when their heads are wrung
receiver and gradually reduced the pressure, he found that the off.” Another experiment was carried out on a hen-sparrow,
appearance of the flame changed and that it was eventually and the bird seemed to be dead 7 min after the pump was
extinguished. He stated that after the first two or three strokes employed. However, when the air was restored, the bird
of the pump, the flame got smaller, became blue in color, and revived and nearly escaped through the top cover, which had
moved further up the wick until it was only at the very top. The been removed. But when the air was removed a second time,
candle then went out. Boyle repeated this experiment with the bird convulsed and died. A mouse inserted into the receiver
other flammable materials including “Coals, in which it behaved in a similar way, being very active initially but when
seemed there had remained some little parcels of Fire,” the pressure was reduced appeared giddy and staggered before

J Appl Physiol • VOL 98 • JANUARY 2005 • www.jap.org

Downloaded from journals.physiology.org/journal/jappl (079.026.005.098) on November 19, 2020.



Historical Perspective
38 ROBERT BOYLE’S EXPERIMENTS

falling down unconscious. Again, the animal was revived when light was transmitted through the evacuated receiver because it
fresh air was let in. was still possible to see objects in it.

In interpreting these experiments, Boyle posed the same These experiments raised the question of whether there was
questions as he did about the burning of candles referred to another medium called “ether” that continued to be present in
above, and which indicate the early state of knowledge about the receiver even if all the air was evacuated. Many scientists
both combustion and respiration. The question was whether of the time thought that to transmit light or magnetism through
“the death of the fore-mention’d Animals preceded from the a space required the existence of some medium. They argued
want of Air, then [than] that the Air was over-clogg’d by the that the air pump might able to remove the air but not the ether.
steams of their Bodies, exquisitely pent up in the glass.” Boyle Experiments on the possible existence of ether were not fol-
argues that his experiments support the former possibility lowed up in this 1660 book but are described in Boyle’s Spring
because, when he removed air with his pump, the animals of the Air, First Continuation (8).
clearly suffered, whereas when he readmitted air they revived. A particularly ingenious experiment was experiment 26 on

Boyle then embarks on a long digression on the nature of the swing of a pendulum. Boyle, or more likely Hooke who had
respiration. He discusses the movement of the lungs and notes done extensive studies on pendulums, expected that a pendu-
that, since they have no muscles themselves, they must be lum would swing slightly more slowly and that the motion
moved by the diaphragm and intercostal muscles. Interestingly, would last longer before decaying in air as opposed to a partial
he states that “the Diaphragme seems the principal Instrument vacuum because the air would impede the motion. Accord-
of ordinary and gentle Respiration.” ingly, two identical pendulums were constructed and set in

There is a long section in which he discusses some of the motion, one inside the receiver, which was evacuated, and one
theories of respiration in the literature, including the belief that outside. To the surprise of the observers, no consistent differ-
its main function is to cool the blood. Much of this is of little ences could be measured between the two pendulums. An
relevance today. However, there is an interesting passage interesting sequel to this is that it is now accepted that the
where Boyle considers “whether or no, if a Man were rais’d to viscosity of a gas is independent of its pressure, a finding that
the very top of the Atmosphere, he would be able to live many is counterintuitive to most people. One of the standard text-
minutes, and would not quickly dye for the want of such Air as books of fluid dynamics when discussing this refers the reader
we are wont to breathe here below.” He then referred to the to Boyle’s experiment done 350 years ago (11).
experience of Joseph de Acosta in the high mountains of Peru Another surprising finding described in experiment 37 oc-
who, when indisposed by the high altitude, stated “I therefore curred on some occasions immediately after the piston was
perswade my self, That the Element of the Air is there so subtle drawn down and the stopcock was then opened. The reduction
and delicate, as it is not proportional with the breathing of Man, of pressure in the receiver was accompanied by a “kinde of
which requires a more gross and temperate Air.” The first Light in the Receiver, almost like a faint flash of Lightning in
edition of Acosta’s famous book was published in 1590 (1), the Day-time, and almost as suddenly did it appear and van-
and it is interesting that Boyle was familiar with it. Boyle ish.” The phenomenon was not always seen but only when the
concluded from all this that there is a special portion of the air engine was “in a good humour” as Boyle put it. The “Appa-
that is essential for life and that when this is removed what rition of Light” could be seen by both candlelight and daylight,
remains will not support life. and following its appearance the sides of the receiver seemed

Boyle found that all living things, including eels that were to be darkened as if some “whitish Steam” adhered to the wall.
placed in his receiver, could not survive a prolonged reduction Boyle was at a loss to understand this phenomenon, but it was
of pressure. However, an exception was house snails, which probably a transient condensation of water vapor produced by
did not seem to be affected, presumably because the amount of the sudden reduction in air pressure.
air that they needed was so small. Behavior of liquids (experiments 20–25, 28, 35, 42, and 43).

Effect of rarifying the air on some physical phenomena When a liquid such as water was placed in the receiver within
(experiments 16, 26, 27, and 37). The great curiosity of Boyle a vial that was tightly closed with a cork, no changes in the
(and presumably Hooke) generated a series of interesting appearance of the liquid were seen. However, if the water was
observations on physical phenomena, but they will only be suddenly exposed to the low pressure, for example by breaking
referred to briefly. In experiment 16, a magnetized needle was the glass neck of the vial, the water immediately started to
placed in the receiver, and Boyle showed that it could still be bubble vigorously. In one experiment, pieces of red coral
deflected by a magnet brought to the outside of the receiver covered by vinegar were placed in the receiver. The result was
after evacuation. This raised the question of how the magnetic the formation of a small number of bubbles at normal pressure,
influence could be propagated in the absence of air. A similar but when the air was rarified with the pump the bubbling
experiment (experiment 27) studied the propagation of sound increased greatly. In a further experiment, water that had been
when a watch was suspended in the receiver by a piece of “boyl’d a pretty while” was placed inside the receiver, and this
thread. Boyle found that the sound of the ticking disappeared time no bubbles appeared with the first three descents of the
when the air pressure was lowered. By contrast the sound made piston. However, when the pressure was further reduced, the
by a bell when it was struck was quieter when the air was water suddenly appeared to boil in the vial “as if it had stood
removed but did not disappear altogether. However, a technical over a very quick Fire.”
problem here was that the material that suspended the bell may The results of these experiments are not surprising to us
have conducted the sound. A further issue was that since not all today, but to Boyle they raised the whole question of the nature
the air could be removed by the pump, the residual air might of gases and liquids and particularly how it was possible for a
have propagated the sound. Of course, Boyle recognized that liquid to contain a gas.

J Appl Physiol • VOL 98 • JANUARY 2005 • www.jap.org

Downloaded from journals.physiology.org/journal/jappl (079.026.005.098) on November 19, 2020.



Historical Perspective
ROBERT BOYLE’S EXPERIMENTS 39

Miscellaneous experiments (experiments 29–31, 34, 38, and volume of a gas, which we now know as Boyle’s Law.
39). Boyle’s curiosity and ingenuity resulted in a number of Hobbes’s argument was more philosophical and had to do with
other experiments, which are now of generally minor interest the penetrative characteristics of air as an ethereal fluid, and
either because the methods were flawed or because the objec- Boyle contended that the experimental evidence was against
tives are of little relevance today. He studied the behavior of this. Boyle’s 1660 book makes satisfying reading even today,
smoke in a partial vacuum because some philosophers had although some modern readers may be put off by the occa-
argued that “Steams or Exhalations” ascend because of “pos- sional bizarre spelling and typography. For that reason, a
itive levity,” i.e., negative weight. The confusion here was the modern version of the text (16) is easier to read. At any event,
failure to recognize that warming a gas reduced its density. In modern students who are interested in high-altitude physiology
another experiment, Boyle wondered whether two “exquisitely should be aware of this classic book.
polish’d” flat pieces of marble would be pressed against each
other by atmospheric pressure in the same way as Guericke’s GRANTS

hemispheres. However, he was unable to obtain two pieces so The work was supported by National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Grant
exactly ground that they remained in contact for more than 1 or RO1 HL-60698.

2 min, which was the time it took him to prepare the experi- REFERENCES
ment. Because he thought that the surfaces were not com-
pletely flat, he wondered whether moistening them with “Spirit 1. Acosta I. Historia Natural y Moral de las Indias. Seville, Spain: Iuan de

Leon, 1590.
of wine” would help, but again the experiment was unsuccess- 2. Bert P. La Pression Barométrique, Paris: Masson, 1878. English transla-
ful and, in any event, Boyle was not aware of the phenomenon tion by Hitchcock MA and Hitchcock FA. Columbus, OH: College Book,
of surface tension. 1943.

Experiment 34 was ingenious in that he wondered whether 3. Boyle R. New Experiments Physico-Mechanicall, Touching the Spring of
the Air, and its Effects (Made, for the Most Part, in a New Pneumatical

he could demonstrate the buoyancy of air by comparing the Engine) Written by Way of Letter to the Right Honorable Charles Lord
weight of a half-filled bladder tied securely at the neck at Vicount of Dungarvan, Eldest Son to the Earl of Corke. Oxford: H. Hall,
normal pressure and after reducing the pressure. The weight 1660.
was obtained by placing the bladder on a balance with metal 4. Boyle R. Some Considerations Touching the Style of the H. Scriptures.

weights at the other end. The results of this experiment were London: H. Herringman, 1661.
5. Boyle R. The Sceptical Chymist, or, Chymico-Physical Doubts & Para-

apparently confused by changes in the weight of the bladder doxes. London: J. Cadwell, 1661.
caused by moisture in the air, and Boyle did not reach any clear 6. Boyle R. New Experiments Physico-Mechanical, Touching the Air:
conclusion. Whereunto is Added A Defence of the Authors Explication of the Exper-

An experiment in which Boyle introduced a mixture of snow iments, Against the Obiections of Franciscus Linus and Thomas Hobbes.
Oxford: H. Hall, 1662.

and common salt into the receiver did not give any clear 7. Boyle R. New experiments concerning the relationship between light and
results, but it allowed Boyle to digress on how ice that formed air (in shining wood and fish). Phil Trans 2: 581–600, 1667.
when water freezes can exert enormous pressures resulting in 8. Boyle R. A Continuation of New Experiments, Physico-Mechanical,
the breaking of stones and other structures. Boyle was unaware Touching the Spring and Weight of the Eir, and their Effects. Oxford: H.

of the fact that water expands as ice is formed. Hall, 1669.
9. Boyle R. New pneumatical observations about respiration. Phil Trans 5:

2011–2031, 1670.
CONCLUSION 10. Boyle R. A Continuation of New Experiments Physico-Mechanical,

Touching the Spring and Weight of the Air, and their Effects. London:
The Boyle-Hooke pneumatical engine not only was a tri- Miles Flesher, 1682.

umph of engineering, but it opened up a whole new field of 11. Chapman S and Cowling TG. The Mathematical Theory of Non-Uniform
study. In its day, it was famous and, for example, it was often Gases (3rd ed.). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1970.
displayed to visitors who came to the Royal Society. Interest- 12. Conant JB. Harvard Case Histories in Experimental Science, Volume 1.

Cambridge, UK: Harvard Univ. Press, 1957.
ingly, Boyle did not immediately continue his experiments on 13. Frank R. Harvey and the Oxford Physiologists. Berkeley, CA: Univ of
reduced air pressure after 1660 but, for example, in 1661 California Press, 1980.
published a book on chemistry, The Sceptical Chymist (5) and, 14. Galileo G. Dialogues Concerning Two New Sciences [1638], translated by
in a completely different area, Style of the Scriptures (4). Crew H and deSalvio A. New York: MacMillan Publishing, 1917.

However, in 1662, he published a second edition of the 1660 15. Harvey W. Exercitatio Anatomica de Motu Cordis et Sanguinis in
Animalibus. Frankfurt, Germany: Guilielmi Fitzeri, 1628.

book with an addendum Whereunto is Added a Defence of the 16. Hunter M and Davis EB. The Works of Robert Boyle, 14 vols. London:
Authors Explication of the Experiments, Against the Obiections Pickering & Chatto, 1999.
of Franciscus Linus and Thomas Hobbes (6). Linus had argued 17. Schott GP. Gasparis Schotti Mechanica Hydraulico-Pneumatica. Fran-
that, although the column of mercury in the Torricellian ba- cofurti ad Moenum: Sumptu Heredum Joannis Godefridi Schönwetteri

Bibliopol. Francofurtens, excudebat Henricus Pigrin, Typographus Herbi-
rometer was partly raised by atmospheric pressure, there was poli, 1657.
another structure called a “funiculus” within the vacuum that 18. Stirling W. Some Apostles of Physiology. London: Waterlow and Sons,
helped to support it. Boyle’s vigorous response was that Linus’ 1902.
hypothesis of a funiculus was “partly precarious, partly unin- 19. Torricelli E. Letter of Torricelli to Michelangelo Ricci, [1644] English

telligible, and partly insufficient, and besides needless.” But translation of relevant pages in High Altitude Physiology, edited by West
JB. Stroudsburg, PA: Hutchinson Ross, 1981.

the most enduring feature of his response was the demonstra- 20. West JB. The original presentation of Boyle’s Law. J Appl Physiol 87:
tion of the inverse relationship between the pressure and 1543–1545, 1999.

J Appl Physiol • VOL 98 • JANUARY 2005 • www.jap.org

Downloaded from journals.physiology.org/journal/jappl (079.026.005.098) on November 19, 2020.