( 17-l ) [XLVIII. 

ART. XLVIII. ON THE DYNAMICAL THEORY OF HEAT, WITH 
NUMERICAL RESULTS DEDUCED FROM MR JOULE'S EQUIVALENT 
OF A THERMAL UNIT. AND M. REGNAULT'S OBSERVATIONS ON 
STEAM. 

[Tra7llaCliom of tile &ual Society of Edinburgh, March, 1851, and Phil. 
Mag. IV. 1852.) 

Introducto,., Notice. 

1. SIR HUMPHRY DAVY, by his experiment of melting two 
pieces of ice by rubbing them together, established the following pro­
position :-" The phenomena of repulsion are not dependent on a 
peculiar elastic fluid for their existence, or caloric does not exist." 
And he concludes that heat consists of a motion excited among 
the particlel:l of bodies. "To distinguish this motion from others, 
and to signify the cause of our sensation of heat," and of the 
expansion or expansive pressure produced in matter by heat, "the 
name repulsive motion has been adopted -." 

2. The dynamical theory of heat, thus established by Sir 
Humphry Davy, is extended to radiant heat by the discovery of 
phenomena, especially those of the polarization of radiant heat, 
which render it excessively probable that heat propagated through 
"vacant space," or through diathermanic substances, consists of 
waves of transverse vibrations in an all-pervading medium. 

* From Davy's first work, entitled An El8ay on Heat, Light, and the ConJbina­
tiOlll 0/ Light, published in 1799. in .. Contributions to Physical and Medical 
Knowledge. principally from the West of England. collected by Thomas Beddoes. 
M.D .... and republished in Dr Davy's edition of his brother's collected works. Vol. u. 
Lond.1836. 

Digitized by Google 



XLVIIL] ON THE DYNAMICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 175 

3. The recent discoveries made by Mayer and Joule-, of the 
generation of heat through the friction of fluids in motion, and by 
the magneto-electric excitation of galvanic currents, would either 
of them be sufficient to demonstrate the immateriality of heat; 
and would so afford, if required, a perfect confirmation of Sir 
Humphry Davy's views. 

4. Considering it as thus established, that heat is not a 
substance, but a dynamical form of mechanical effect, we perceive 
that there must be an equivalence between mechanical work and 
heat, as between cause and effect. The first published statement 
of this principle appears to be in Mayer's Bemerlcungen iiber die 
Krafte der un/Jelebten Naturt, which contains some correct views 
regarding the mut-ual convertibility of heat and mechanical effect, 
along with a false analogy between the approach of a weight to 
the earth and a diminution of the volume of a continuous sub­
stance, on which an attempt is founded to find numerically the 
mechanical equivalent of a given quantity of heat. In a paper 
published about fourteen months later, "On the Calorific Effects 
of Magneto-Electricity and the Mechanical Value of Heat!," 
Mr Joule of Manchester expresses very distinctly the consequences 
regarding the mutual convertibility of heat and mechanical effect 
which follow from the fact, that heat is not a substance but a 
state of motion; and investigates on unquestionable principles 
the "absolute numerical relations," according to which heat is 
connected with mechanical power; verifying experimentally, that 
wllene.ver heat is generated from purely mechanical action, and no 
other effect produced, whether it be by means of the friction of 
fluids or by the magneto-electric excitation of galvanic currents, 
the same quantity is generated by the same amount of work 
spent; and determining the actual amount of work, in foot-pounds, 

• In May, 1842, Mayer aDnounced in the A_un of Wohler and Liebig, that he 
bad raised the temperatnre of water from 120 to 13° Cent. by agitating it. In 
Auguet, 1843, Joule announced to the British Association .. That heat ie evolved by 
the passage of water through narrow tubes;" and that he had" obtained one degree 
of heat per lb. of water from a mechanical force capable of raising 770 lbs. to the 
height of one foot;" and that heat ie generated when work is spent in turning a 
magneto-electrio machine, or an electro-magnetio engine. (See hie paper "On the 
Calorifio Effects of Magneto-Electricity, and on the Mechanical Value of Heat."­
Phil. Mag., VoL XXIII., 1843.) 

t Annalen of Wohler and Liebig, May, 1842. 
~ Britieh A88ociation, August, 1843; and Phil. Jlal., Sept., 1848. 

Digitized by Google 



176 ON THE DYNAMICAL THEORY OF HEAT. [XLVIII. 

required to generate a unit of heat, which he calls" the mechani­
cal equivalent of heat." Since the publication of that paper, 
Mr Joule has made numerous series of experiments for deter­
mining with as much accuracy as possible the mechanical equiva­
lent of heat so defined, and hus given acconnts of them in various 
communications to the British Association, to the Philosophical, 
~!t[agazine, to the Royal Society, and to the French Institute. 

S. Important contributions to the dynamical theory of heat 
have recently been made by Rankine and Clausius; who, by 
mathematical reasoning analogous to Carnot's on the motive 
power of heat, but founded on an axiom contrary to his funda­
mental axiom, have arrived at some J·emarkable conclusions. 
The researches of these authors have been published in the 
Transactions of this Society, and in Poggendorff's Annalen, during 
the past year; and tlley are more particularly referred to below in 
connexion with corresponding parts of the investigations at present 
laid before the Royal Society. 

[Various statements regarding animal heat, and the heat of 
combustion and chemical combination, are made in the writings of 
Liebig (as, for instance, the statement quoted in the foot-note 
added to § 18 below), which virtually imply the convertibility of 
heat into mechanical effect, and which are inconsistent with any 
other than the dynamical theory of heat.] 

6. The object of the present paper is threefold:-

(1) To show what modifications of the conclusions arrived at 
by Carnot, and by others who have followed his peculiar mode of 
reasoniog regarding the motive power of heat, must be made when 
the hypothesis of the dynamical theory, contrary as it is to 
Carnot's fundamental hypothesis, is adopted. 

(2) To point out the significance in the dynamical theory, of 
the numerical results deduced from Regnault's observations on 
steam, and communicated about two years ago to the Society, 
with an account of Carnot's theory, by the author of the present 
paper; and to show that by taking these numbers (subject to 
correction when accurate experimentru data regarding the density 
of saturated steam shall have been afforded), in connexion with 
Joule's mechanical equivalent of a thermal unit, a complete theory 

Digitized by Google 



XLvm] ON THE DYNAMICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 177 

of the motive power of heat, within the temperature limits of the 
experimental data, is obtained. 

(3) To point out some remarkable relations connecting the 
physical properties of all substances, established by rell.'!oning 
analogous to that of Camot, but founded in part on the contrary 
principle of the dynamical theory. 

PART I. 

Fundamental Prinrnples in the Theory u/ the JJotilie PO'1oel' of 
Heat. 

7. According to an obvious principle, first introduced, how­
ever, into the theory of the moti ve power of heat by Camot, . 
mechanical effect produced in any process cannot be said to have 
been derived fiom a purely thermal source, unless at the end ot 
the process all the materials used are in precisely the same phy­
sical and mechanical circumstances a.o; they were at the beginning. 
In some conceivable" thermo-dynamic engines," as for instance 
Faraday'S floating magnet, or Barlow's" wheel and axle," made to 
rotate and perform work uniformly by means of a current continu­
ouslyexcited by heat communicated to two metals in contact, or 
the thermo-electric rotatory apparatus devised by Marsh, which 
has been actually constmcted; this condition is fulfilled at every 
instant. On the other hand, in all thermo-dynamic engines, 
founded on electrical agency, in which discontinuous galvanic 
currents, or pieces of soft iron in a variable state of magnetization, 
are used, and in all engines founded on the alternate expansions 
and contractions of media, there are really alterations in the 
condition of materials; but, in accordance with the principle 
stated above, these alterations must be strictly periodical. In any 
such engine, the series of motions performed during a period, at 
the end of which the materials are restored to precisely the same 
condition as that in which the'y existed at the beginning, con­
stitutes what will be called a complete cycle of its operations. 
Whenever in what follows, the wOI·k done or the mechanical effect 
produced by a thermo-dynamic engine is mentioned without quali­
fication, it must be understood that the mechanical effect pro­
duced, either in a non-varying engine, or in a complete cycle, 
or any number of complete cycles of a periodical engine, is meant. 

T. 12 

Digitized by Google 



178 ON THE DYNAMICAL THEORY OF HEAT. [XLVIII. 

8. The source of heat will always be supposed to be a hot 
body at a given constant temperature, put in conUwt with Bome 
part of the engine; and when any part of the engine is to he kept 
from lising in temperature (which can only be done by drawing oft' 
whatever heat is d~posited in it), this will be supposed to be done 
by putting a cold body, which will be called the refrigerator, at a 
given constant temperature in contact with it. 

9. The whole theory of the motive power of heat is founded 
on the two following propositions, due, respectively to Joule, and 
to Camot and Clausius. 

PRoP. I. (Joule).-When equal quantities of mechanical effect 
are produced by any means whatever from purely thermal sources, 

. or lost in purely thermal effects, equal quantities of heat are put 
out of existence or are generated. 

PRoP. II. (Camot and Clausius).-lf an engine be such that, 
when it is worked backwards, the physical and mechanical agen­
cies in every part of its motions are all reversed, it produces as 
much mechanical effect as can be produced by any thermo­
dynamic engine, with the same temperatures of source and refri­
gerator, from a given quantity of heat. 

10. The former proposition is shown to be included in the 
general "principle of mechanical effect," and is so established 
beyond all doubt by the following demonstration. 

11. By whatever direct effect the heat gained or lost by a 
body in ony conceivable circumstances is tested, the measurement 
of its quantity may always be founded on a determination of the 
quantity of some standard substance, which it or any equal 
quantity of heat could raise from one standard temperature to 
another; the test of equality between two quantities of heat being 
their capability of raising equal quantities of any substance from 
any temperature to the same higher temperature. Now, according 
to the dynamical theory of heat, the temperatute of a substance 
'can only be raised by working upon it in some way so as to pro­
duce increased thermal motions within it, besides effecting any 
modifications in the mutual dista.nces or arrangements of its 
particles which may accompany 'a change of temperature. The 
work necessary to produce this total mechanical effect is of course 
proportional to the quantity of the substance raised from one 

Digitized by Google 



XLVIII.] ON THE DYNAMICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 179 

standard temperature to another; and therefore when a body, 
or a group of bodies, or a machine, parts with or receives heat, 
there is in reality mechanical effect produced from it, or taken 
into it, to an extent precisely proportional to the quantity of heat 
which it emits or absorbs. But the work which any external 
forces do upon it, the wo~k done by its own molecular forces, and 
the amount by which the half vis viva of the thermal motions of 
all its parts is diminished, must·together be equal to the mechani­
cal effect produced from it; and consequently, to the mechanical 
equivalent of the heat which it emits (which will be positive 
or negative, according as the 8um of those terms is positive or 
negative). Now let there be either no molecular change or altera­
tion of temperature in any part of the body, or, by a cycle of 
operations, let t.he temperature and physical condition be restored 
exactly to what they were at tbe beginning; the second and 
third of the three parts of the work which it has to produce 
vanish; and we conclude that the heat which it emits or absorbs 
will be the thermal equivalent of the work done upon it by 
external forces, or done by it against external forces; which is the 
proposition to be proved. 

12. The demonstration of the second proposition is founded 
on the following axiom:-

It is imp08sible, by means of inanimate material Q(Jency, to 
derive f'MChanical effect from any porticm. of matter by cooling 
it belm.u the temperature of the coldest of the 8urrounding objects-. 

13. To demonstrate the second proposition, let .A and B be 
two thermo-dynamic engines, of which B satisfies the conditions 
expressed in the enunciation; and let, if possible, .A derive more 
work from a given quantity of heat than B, when their sources 
and refrigerators are at the same temperatures, respectively. 
Then on account of the condition of complete reversibility in all its 
operations which it fulfils, B may be worked backwards, and 
made to restore any quantity of heat to it.s source, by the expen­
diture of the amount of work which, by its forward action, it 
would derive from the same quantity of heat. If, therefore, B be 

• If this axiom be denied for all temperatures, it would have to be admitted 
that a self-acting machine might be set to work and produce mechanical effect by 
cooling the sea or earth, with no limit but the total 1088 of heat from the earth and 
_, or, in reality, from the whole material world. 

12-2 

Digitized by Google 



180 ON THE DYN..unCAL THEORY OJ!' HEAT. [XLVIII. 

worked backwards, and made to restore to the source of .A (which 
we may suppose to be adjustable to the engine B) as much heat 
as has been drawn from it during a certain period of the working 
of A, a smaller amount of work will be spent thus than was gained 
by the working of A. Hence, if such a series of operations of .4 
forwards and of B backwards be continued, either alternately 
or simultaneously, there will result a continued production of work 
without any continued abstraction of heat from the source; and, 
by Prop. l., it follows that there must be more heat abstracted 
from the refrigerator by the working of B backwards than is 
deposited in it by.4. Now it is obvious that A might be made 
to spend part of its work in working B backwards, and the whole 
ruight be made self-acting. Also, there being no heat either 
taken from or given to the source on the whole, all the surround­
ing bodies and space except th.e refrigerator might, without 
interfering with any of the conditions which have been assumed, 
be made of the same temperature as the source, whatever that 
may be. We should thus have a self-acting machine, capable of 
drawing h~t constantly from a body surrounded by others at 
a higher temperature, and converting it into mechanical effect. 
But this is contrary to the axiom, and therefore we conclude that 
the hypothesis that .A derives more mechanical effect from the 
same quantity of heat drawn from the source than B, is false. 
Hence 110 engine whatever, with source and refrigerator at the 
same temperatures, can get more work from a given quantity 
of heat introduced than any engine which satisfies the condition of 
reversibility, which was to be proved. 

140. This proposition was first enunciated by Carnot, being 
the expression of his criterion of a perfect thermo-dynamic engine*. 
He proved it by demonstrating that a negation of it would require 
the admission that there might be a self-acting machine con­
structed which would produce mechanical effect indefinitely, with­
out any source either in heat or the consumption of materials, 
or any other physical agency; but this demonstration involves, 
fundamentally, the assumption. that, in "a complete cycle of 
operations," the medium parts with exactly the same quantity of 
heat as it receives. A very strong expression of doubt regarding 
the truth of this assumption, as a universal principle, is given by 

• Account of Carnot's Theory, § lB. 

Digitized by Google 



XLVIII.] ON THE DYNAllICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 181 

Camot himself-; and that it is false, where mechanical work is, on 
the whole, either gained or spent in the operations, may (as I have 
tried to show above) be considered to be perfectly certain. It 
must then be admitted that Carnot's original demonstration 
utterly fails, but we cannot infer that the proposition concluded is 
false. The truth of the conclusion appeared to me, indeed, so 
probable, that I took it in connexion with Joule's principle, on 
account of which Camot's demonstration of it fails, as the founda­
tion of an investigation of the motive power of heat in air-engines 
or steam-engines through finite ranges of temperature, and ob­
tained about a year ago results, of which the substance is given 
in the second part of the paper at present communicated to the 
Royal Society. It was not until the commencement of the present 
year that I found the demonstration given above, by which the 
truth of the proposition is established upon an axiom (§ 12) which 
I think will be generally admitted. It is with uo wish to claim 
priority that I make these statements, as the merit of first 
establishing the proposition upon correct principles is entirely due 
to Clausius, who published his demonstratiou of it in the month of 
May last year, in the second part of his paper on the motive 
power of heatt. I may be allowed to add, that I have given the 
demonstration exactly as it occurred to me before I knew that 
Clausius had either enuncia.ted or demonstrated the proposition. 
The following is the axiom on which Clausius' demonstration 
is founded :-

It is impossible for a self-acting machine, unaided by any etC­

ternal agency, to convey heat from one body to another at a higher 
temperature. 

It is easily shown, that, although this and the axiom I have 
used are different in form, either is a consequence of the other. 
The reasoning in each demonstration is strictly analogous to that 
which Camot orginally gave. 

15. A complete theory of the motive power_ of heat would 
consist of the application of the two propositions demonstrated 
above, to every possible method of producing mechanical effect 
from thermal agency!. As yet this has not been done for the 

• Account of CarDot'. Theury, § 6. 
t Poggendorlrs Amu&ltn, referred to above. . 
::: .. There are at present known two, and only, two, distinct ways in whirl! 

Digitized by Google 



182 ON THE DYNAMICAL THEORY OF HEAT. [XLVIII. 

electrical method. as far 88 regards the criterion of a perfect engine 
implied in the second proposition, and probably cannot be done 
without certain limitations; but the application of the first propo­
sition has been very thoroughly investigated, and verified experi­
mentally by Mr Joule in his researches "On the Calorific Effects 
of Magneto-Electricity;" and on it is founded oue of his ways of 
determining experimentally the mechanical equivalent of heat. 
Thus, from his discovery of the laws of generation of heat in the 
galvanic circuit-, it follows that when mechanical work by means 
of a magneto-electric machine is the source of the galvanism. the 
heat generated in any given portion of the fixed part of the 
circuit is proportional to the whole work spent; and from his 
experimental demonstration that heat is developed in any moving 
part of the circuit at exactly the same rate as if it were at 
rest, and traversed by a current of the same strength, he is enabled 
to conclude--

(1) That heat may be created by working a magneto-electric 
machine. 

(2) That if the current excited be not allowed to produce any 
other than thermal effects, the total quantity of heat produced 
is in all circumstances exactly proportional to the quantity of 
work spent. 

16. Again. the admirable discovery of Peltier, that cold is 
produced by an electrical current passing from bismuth to anti-:­
mony, is referred to by Joulet. as showing how it may be proved 
mechanical effect can be obtained from heat. One of these is by the alterations of 
volume which bodies experience through the action of heat; the other is through 
the medium of electric agency."-" Acconntof Camot's Theory," § 4. (Tramacticnu, 
Vol. XVL part 5.) 

• That, in a given fixed part of the circuit, the heat evolved in a given time is 
proportional to the &quare of the strength of the current, and for di1Jerent fixed 
parts, with the same strength of current, the quantities of heat evolved in equal 
times are as the resistances. A paper by Mr Joule, containing demonstrations of 
these laws, and of others on the relations of the chemical and thermal agencies 
concerned, was communicated to the Royal Society on the 17th of December, 
1840, but was not pubhshed in the TramactiOlU. (See abstract oontaining a 
statement of the laws quoted above, in the Phiw.ophical Magazim, VoL xvm. 
p. 808.) It was published in the PhiWBophi4:al Magazine in October, 1841 (Vol. XIX. 
p.260). 

t [Note of March 20, 1852, added in Phil. Mag. reprint. In the introduction to 
his paper on the "Calorific ElIecte of Magneto-Electrioity," kc., Phil. Mag., 1843. 

I take this opportunity of mentioning that I ha"e only recently become DC· 

Digitized by Google 



XLVIII.] ON THE DYNAMICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 183 

that, when an electrical current is continuously produced from .a 
purely thermal source, the quantities of heat evolved electrically 
in the different homogeneous parts of the circuit are only compen­
sations for a loss from the junctions of the different metals, or 
that, when the effect of the current is entirely thermal, there must 
be just as much heat emitted from the parts not affected by the 
source as is taken from the source. 

17. Lastly·, when a current produced by thermal agency is 
made to work an engine and produce mechanical effect, there will 
be less heat emitted from the parts of the circuit not affected by 
the source than is taken in from the source, by an amount 
precisely equivalent to the mechanical effect produced; since Joule 
demonstrates experimentally, that a current from any kind of 

quainted with Helmholtz's admirable treatise on the priuciple of mechanical effect 
(Ueber die ErlUlltung der Krait, von Dr H. Helmholtz. llerlin. G. Heimer, 18-17), 
having seen it for the first time ou the 20th of January of this year; and that I 
should have had occasiun to refer to it on this, and on numerous other points of 
the dynamical theory of heat, the mechanical theory of electrolysis, the thcory of 
electro-magnetic illlluction, and the mechanical theory of thermo-electrio currents, 
in various papers communicatecl to the lloyal Society of Edinburgh, and to this 
Magazine, had I been acquainted with it iu time.-W. T., March 20, 1852.] 

• This reasoning was suggel'ted to me by the following pl\Rsage contained in a 
letter which I recei .. ed from Mr Joule on the 8th of July, 1847. "In Peltier's 
experiment on cold produced I\t the bismuth I\nd antimony Bolder, we have an 
instance of the conversion of h(oat into the mechanical force of the current," which 
must have been meant as an answer to a remark I had made, that no evidence could 
be adduced to show that heat is ever put out of existence. I now fully admit the 
force of that answer; but it would require a proof that there is more heat put out 
of existence at the heated soltlering [or in this and other part~ of the circuit] than is 
created at the cold Roltlering [anti the remainder of the circuit, when a mnchine is 
driven by the current] to make the "evidence" be e.rpaimell/ol. That this is tho 
case I think is certain, because the statements of § Hi in the t(>xt arc demonRtrated 
consequences of the first fundamental proposition; bnt it i-l ~till to be remarked. 
that neither in this nor in any other caso of the prodnction of mechanical effect 
from purely thermal ag.'ncy, has the eel\sin~ to exi:;t of an equi .. alcnt quantity of 
heat been demonstrated othel'wiso than theoretically. It would be a wry great 
step in the experimental iIIul'tration (or 1w(t;'-a/ioll, for those who consider such 
to be necessary) of tho dynamical theory of heat. to actually show in anyone caMe a 
1088 of heat; and it might be dono by operating through a very eon,id<:rable range 
of temperatures with a good air-engine or steam-engine, not II1l0we,1 to waste its 
work in friction. As will be Sl'cn in Part. II. of this paper, no eXI't.'rimt'nt of allY 
kind could show a eUlll'ideraLlc 10';'; "r IKat without (,lll\,loyill~ bUllies t1iJfcIiIl~ 

. considerably in temperature; fur instanc(>. II lo;s of as much as 'l~JS, or about one­
tenth of the whole heat used, if the temperature of all the bodies u:;ed be between 
(jJ and 3()0 Cen t. 

Digitized by Google 



184 ON THE DYNAKICALTHEORY OF HEAT. [XLVW. 

source driving an engine, produces in the engine just as much 
less heat than it would produce in a fixed wire exercising the 
same resistance as is equivalent to the mechanical effect produCed 
by the engine. . 

18. The quality of thermal effects, resulting from equal 
causes through very different means, is beautifully illustrated by 
the following statement, drawn from Mr J ouIe's paper on magneto­
electricity·. 

Let there be three equal and similar galvanic batteries fur­
nished with equal and similar electrodes; let Al and B, be the 
terminations of the electrodes (or wires connected with the two 
poles) of the first battery, A. and .B. the terminations of the 
corresponding electrodes of the second, and A. and B. of the third 
battery. Let AI and BI be connected with the extremities of 
a long fixed wire; let AI and BI be connected with the .. poles" 
of an electrolytic apparatus for the decomposition of wa.ter; and 
let A. and B. be connected with the poles (or ports as they might 
be called) of an electro-magnetic engine. Then if the length of 
the wire between AI and Bt' and the speed of the engine between 
A. and B., be so adjusted that the strength of the current (which 
for simplicity we may suppose to be continuous and perfectly 
uniform in each case) may be the same in the three circuits, there 
will be more heat given out in any time in the wire between At 
and BI than in the electrolytic apparatus between AI and BI , or the 
working engine between A. and D.. But if the hydrogen were 
allowed to burn in the oxygen, within the electrolytic vessel, and 
the engine to waste all its work without producing any other than 
thermal effects (as it would do, for instance, if all its work were 
spent in continuously agitating a limited fluid mass), the total 
heat emitted would be precisely the same in each of these two 
pieces of apparatus as in the wire between .At and R,• It is 
worthy of remark that these propositions are rigorously true, being 
demonstrable consequences of the fundamental principle of the 
dynamical theory of heat, which have been discovered by Joule, 

• In this paper reference is made to biB previous paper .. On the Heat of 
Electrolysis" (published in VoL vn. parl2, of the second aeries of the Literary and 
Pbiloeophioal Society of Manchester) for; experimental demonstration of those psrta 
of the theory in which chemical action is concerned. 

Digitized by Google 



XLVIII.] ON THE DYNAJUCAL THEORY OF HEAT. 185 

and illustrated and verified most copiously in his experimental 
researches -. 

19. Both the fundamental propositions may be applied in a 
perfectly rigorous manner to the second of the known methods of 
producing mechanical effect from thermal agency. This applica­
tion of the first of the two fundamental propositions has already 
been published by Rankine and Clausius; and that of the second. 
as Clausius showed in his published paper, is simply Carnot's 
unmodified investigation of the relation between the mechanical 
effect produced and the thermal circumstances from which it 
originates, in the case of an expansive engine working within an 
infinitely small range of temperatures.. The simplest investigation 
of the consequences of the first proposition in tbis application, 
which has occurred to me, is the following, being merely the 
modification of an analytical expression of Carnot's axiom re­
garding the permanence of heat. which was given in my former 
papert, required to make it express, not Carnot's axiom. but 
Joule's. 

20. Let us suppose a mass! of any substance, occupying 
a volume fI, under a pressure p uniform in all directions, and at a 
tempemture t, to expand in volume to " + dv, and to rise in tem-

[. Note of March 20, 1852, added iD PhiZ. Mag. reprint. I have recently 
met with the following passage in Liebig'8 ..4l1imal Chemutry (8rd edit. London, 
1846, p. 48), in which the dynamical theory of the heat both of oombu8iioD 
and of the galvanio battery is indicated, if not fully expreaaed:-"Wben we 
kindle a 1lre under a steam..engine, and employ the power obtained to produce 
heat by lrioiion, it is impOBBible Ulat the heat thus obtained can ever be greater 
than Ulat which was required to heat the boiler; and if we use the galvanio ourrent 
to produce heat, tl)e amount of heat obtained is never in any oircWDstan088 
greater than we might have by the oombuaiion of the zino which haa been dissolved 
in thll acid." 

A paper "On the Heat of Chemical Combinaiion," by Dr Thomas Woods, pub­
lished last October in the Philolophical J/agazine, oontains an independent and direct 
experimental demonstraiion of the proposiiion stated in the text regarding the 
oomparaiive thermal effects in a fixed metallio wire, and an electrolytio vessel 
for the deoomposiiion of water, produced by a galvanio ourrent.-W. T., March 20, 
1852.] 

t .. Account of Camot's Theory," foot·note on § 26. 
::: This may have parts oonsiaiing of different subatanoea, or of the same BUb­

stance in different states, provided the temperature of all be the same. See below 
Part m., § 58-00. 

DigilizedbyGoogle " 



186 ON THE DYNAMICAL THEORY OF HEAT. [XLVIII. 

perature to t + tit. The quantity of work which it will produce 
will be 

pdv; 
and the quantity of heat which must be added to it to make its 
temperature rise during the expansion to t + dt may be denoted by 

Mdv+Ndt. 
The mechanical equivalent of this is 

J(Mdv + Ndt), 
if J denote the mechanical equivalent of a unit of heat. Hence 
the mechanical measure of the total external effect produced in 
the circumstances is 

(p-JM) dv-JXdt. 
The total external effect, after any finite amount of expansion, 
accompanied by any continuous chauge of temperature, has taken 
place, will consequently be, in mechanical terms, 

!{(p-JM)dv-JNdt}; 

where we must suppose t to vary with v, so as to be the actual 
temperature of the medium at each instant, and the integration 
with reference to v must be performed between limits correspond­
ing to the initial and final volumes. Now if, at any subsequent 
time, the volume and temperature of the medium become what 
they were at the beginning, however arbitrarily they may have 
been made to vary in the period, the total external effect must, 
according to Prop. I., amount to nothing; and hence 

(p - JM) av - JNdt· 
must be the differential of a function of two independent variables, 
or we must have 

d(p-JM) d (-IN) . 
dt = du .•...•..•••••.••.•.. (1), 

this being merely the analytical expression of the condition, that 
the preceding integral may vanish in every case in which the 

[* The integral function j{(JM-P)d"+JNdt} ~y obviously be called the 

rMchtmical mrrOY of the fluid mass; as (when the constant of integration is pro­
perly assigned) it expresses the whole work the fluid has in it to produce. The 
consideration of this function is the subject of a short paper communicated to the 
Royal Society of Edinburgh, Dec. 15, 1851, as an appendix to the paper at present 
republished; (see below Part v. IS 81-96).] 

Digitized by Google 



XLVUI.] ON THE DYNAMICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 187 

initial and final values or v and t are the same, respectively. 
Observing that J is an absolute constant, we may put the result 
into the form 

: = J (~~ - ~%) ..................... (2). 

This equation expresses, in a perfectly comprehensive manner, 
the application of the first fundamental proposition to the ther­
mal a.nd mechanical circumstances of any substance whatever, 
under uniform pressure in all directions, when subjected to any 
possible variations of temperature, volume and pressure. 

21. The corresponding application of the second fundamental 
proposition is completely expressed by the equation 

dp 
dt = I'M. ............................(3), 

where I' denotes what is called" Camot's function," a quantity 
which has an absolute value, the same for all substances for any 
given temperature, but which may vary with the temperature in 
a manner that can only be determined by experiment. To prove 
this proposition, it may be remarked in the first place that 
Prop. II could not be true for every case in which the tempera­
ture of the refrigerator differs infinitely little from that of the 
source, without being true universally. Now, if a substance be' 
allowed first to expand from v to v + dv, its temperature being 
kept constantly t j if, secondly, it be allowed to expand further, 
without either emitting or absorbing heat till its temperature 
goes down through an infinitely small range, to t - Tj if, thirdly, 
it be compressed at the constant temperature t - T, so much 
(actually by an amount differing from dv by only an infinitely 
small quantity of the second order), that when, fourthly, the 
volume is further diminished to v without the medium's being 
allowed to eith~r emit or absorb heat, its temperature may be 
exactly tj it may be considered as constituting a thermo-dynamic 
engine which fulfils Carnot's condition of complete reversibility. 
Hence, by Prop. II, it must produce the same amount of work 
for the same quantity of heat absorbed in the first operation, as 
any other substance similarly operated upon through the same 

range of temperatures. But 1ft T. <if} is obviously the whole work 

Digitized by Google 



188 ON THE DYNAMICAL THEORY OF HEAT. [XLVIII. 

done in the complete cycle, and (by the definition of 1.1 in § 20) 
Mdv is the quantity of heat absorbed in the first operation. 
Hence the value of 

dp dp 
dt T • dv dt 

Mdv-' or"M T , 

must be the same for all substances, with the same values of t 
and Tj or, since T is not involved except as a factor, we must have 

dp 

1dJt = p. ••.••••••..••.•..•.•.••.•..••• (4), 

where p. depends only on t; from which we conclude the propo­
sition which wag to be proved. 

[Note of Nov. 0,1881. Elimination of ~: by (2) from (4) gives 

J (~l.l! _ dS) 
tit dv 

J1 =p. .................... (4'), 

a very convenient and importaut formula.] 
dp 

22. The very remarkable theorem t Im t M;li  must b e t h e same 

for all sub"tauccs at the same temperature, was first given 
(although not in precisely the same terms) by Carnot, allll demon­
strated by him, accunling to the principles he adopted. We have 
now seen that its truth may be satisfactorily establi"hed without 
adopting the false part of his principles. Hence all Carnot's con­
clusions, and all conclusions derived by others from his theory, 
which depend merdy on equation (:3), require no modification 
when the dynamical theory is adopted. Thus, all the conclusions 
contained in Sections I., II., and III., of the Appendix to my 
"Account of Carnot's Theory" [Art. xu. §§ 43-53 above], and 
in the paper immediately following it in the Transactions [and in 
the present reprint], entitled "Theoretical Considerations on 
the Effect of Pressure in Lowerillg the Freezing Point of 'Vater," 
by my elder brother, still hold. Also, we see that Camot's ex­
pression for the mechanical effect derivable from a given quantity 
of heat by means of a perfect engine in which the range of 
temperatures is infinitely small, expresses truly the greatest effect 

Digitized by Google 



XLVIII.] ON THE DYNAMICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 189 

which can possibly be obtained in the circumstances; although 
it is in reality only an infinitely small fraction of the whole 
mechanical equivalent of the heat supplied; the remainder being 
irrecoverably lost to man, and therefore cc wasted," although not 
annihilated. 

23. On the other hand, the expression for the mechanical 
effect obtainable from a given quantity of heat entering an engine 
from a cc source" at a given temperature, when the range down 
to the temperature of the cold part of the engine or the .. refri­
gerator" is finite, will differ most materially from that of Carnot; 
since, a finite quantity of mechanical effect being now obtained 
from a finite quantity of heat entering the engine, a finite fraction 
of this quantity must be converted from heat into mechanical 
effect. The investigation of this expression, with numerical de­
terminations founded on the numbers deduced from Regnault's 
observations on steam, which are shown in Tables 1 and II. of my 
former paper, constitutes the second part of the paper at present 
communicated. . 

PART II. 

On the Motive Power of Heat through Finite Ranges of 
Temperature. 

24. It is required to determine the quantity of" work which a 
perfect engine, supplied from a source at any temperature, S, and 
parting with its waste neat to a refrigerator at any lower tem­
perature, T, will produce from a given quantity, H, of heat drawn 
from the BOurce. 

25. We may suppose the engine to consist of an infinite 
number of perfect engines, each working within an infinitely small 
range of temperature, and arranged in a Meries of which the source 
of the first is the given BOurce, the refrigerator of the last the 
given refrigerator, and the refrigerator of each intermediate engine 
is the source of that which follows it in the series. Each of these 
engines will, in any time, emit just as much less heat to its 
refrigerator than is supplied to it from its source, as is the equiva­
lent of the mechanical work which it produces. Hence if t and 
t + dt denote respectively the temperatures of the refrigerator and 

Digitized by Google 



190 ON THE DYNAMICAL THEORY OF HEAT. [XLVIII. 

source of one of the intennediate engines. and if q denote the 
quantity of heat which this engine discharges into its refrigerator 
in any time, and q + dq the quantity which it draws from its 
source in the same time, the quantity of work which it produces 
in that time will be J dq according to Prop. I. and it will also be 
qp.dt according to the expression of Prop. II., investigated in § 21 ; 
and therefore we must have 

Jdq =qp.dt. 

Hence. supposing that the quantity of heat supplied from the first 
source, in the time considered is H, we find by integration 

H 1/8 
log q = J t p.dt. 

But the value of q, when t = T, is the final remainder discharged 
. into the refrigerator at the temperature T; and therefore, if this 

be denoted by R, we have 

10g H 1f8 .
B = J Tp.dt ........................ (OJ ); 

from which we deduce 

R =He-~.G.,.,u .......................... (6). 

Now the whole amount of work produced will be the mechanical 
equivalent of the quantity of heat lost; and, therefore, if this be 
denoted by W, we have 

W=J(H-R) .........................( 7). 
and consequently, by (6), 

W=JH{l-e-JI tT" tU} ....................( 8). 

26. To compare this with the expreasion H f;p.dt, for the 

duty indicated by Carnot's theory., we may expand the expo­
nential in the preceding equation, by the usual series. We thus 

find w= (1- 1 ~2 +1.~.3 -&c.).H f:p.dt 1 
1 8 ~ ...... (9). 

where O=Jfru J 
* "Account," &.l., Equation 7. § 81. [Art. XLI. above.] 

Digitized by Google 



XLVIII.] ON THE DYNAMICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 191 

This shows that the work really produced, which always falls 
short of the duty indicated by Carnot's theory, approaches more 
and more nearly to it as the range is diminished j and ultimately, 
when the range is infinitely small, is the same as if Carnot's 
theory required no modification, which agrees with the conclusion 
stated above in § 22. 

27. Again, equation (8) shows that the real duty of a given 
quantity of heat supplied from the source increases with every 
increase of the rangej but that instead of increasing indefinitely 

in proportion to J:J.Ult, as Carnot's theory makes it do, it never 

reaches the value JH, but approximates to this limit, as J~t is 
increased without limit. Hence Carnot's remark* regarding the 
practical advantage that may be anticipated from the use of the 
air-engine, or from any method by which the range of tempera.­
tures may be increased, loses only a part of its importance, while 
a much more satisfactory view than his of the practical problem 
is afforded. Thus we see that, although the full equivalent of 
mechanical effect cannot be obtained even by means of a perfect 
engine, yet when the actual source of heat is at a high enough 
temperature above the surrounding objects, we may get more and 
more nearly the whole of the admitted heat converted into 
mechanical effect, by simply increasing the effective range of 
temperature in the engine. 

28. The preceding investigation (§ 25) shows that the value 
of Carnot's function, p., for all temperatures within the range of 
the engine, and the absolute value of Joule's equivalent, J, are 
enough of data to calculate the amount of mechanical effect of a 
perfect engine of any kind, whether a steam-engine, an air-engine, 
or even a thermo-electric enginej since, according to the axiom 
stated in § 12, and the demonstration of Prop. II., no inanimate 
material agency could produce more mechanical effect from a 
given quantity of heat, with a given available range of tempera­
tures, than an engine satisfying the criterion stated in the enun­
ciation of the proposition. 

• .. Account," &c. Appendix, Section IT. [Art. XLI. above.] 

DigilizedbyGoogle .. 



192 ON THE DYNAMICAL THEORY OF HEAT. [XLVIII. 

29. The mechanical equivalent of a thermal unit Fahrenheit, 
or the quantity of heat necessary to raise the temperature of a 
pound of water from 32° to 33° Fahr., has been determined by 
Joule in foot-pounds at Manchester, and the value which he gives 
as his best determination is 772·G!). Mr Rankine takes, as 
the result of Joule's determination 772, which he estimates must 
be within m of its own amount, of the truth. If we take 772~ 
as the number, we find, by multiplying it by i, 1390 as the 
equivalent of the thermal unit Centigrade, which is taken as the 
value of J in the numerical applications contained in the present 
paper. ~ote of Jan. 12, 1H82. Joule's recent redetermination 
gives 771·8 Manchester foot-pounds as the work required to warm 
lIb. of water from 3~ to 3:3° Fahr.] 

30. With regard to the determination of the values of '" for 
different temperatures, it is to be remarked that equation (4) 
shows that this might be done by experiments upon any substance 
whatever of indestructible texture, and indicates exactly the ex­
perimental data required in each case. For instance, by first 
supposing the medium to Le air; and again, by supposing it to 
consist partly of liquid water and partly of saturated vapour, we 
deduce, as is shown ill Part III. of this paper, the two expressions 
(6), given in § 30 of my former paper (" Account of Carnot's 
Theory"), for the value of '" at any temperature. As yet no 
experiments have been made upon air which afford the required 
data for calculating the value of", through any extensive range of 
temperature; but for temperatures between 50° and 60° Fahr., 
Joule's experiments * on the heat evolved by the expenditure of 
a given amount of work on the compression of air kept at a 
constant temperature, afford the most direct data for thi3 object 
which have yet been obtained; since, if Q be the quantity of heat 
evolved by the compression of a fluid subject to "the gaseous n 
laws" of expansion 11.1111 compressiLility, 11' the amount of mechani­
cal work spent, and t the constant temperature of the fluid, we 
have by (11) of § 49 of my former paper, 

'" = Q (~~~-t)" ........................ (lO), 

* .. On the Changes of Temperature produced by the Rarefaction and Condensa­
tion or Air," Phil .•Vag., Vol. XXVI., May, 1845. 

Digitized by Coogle 



XLVIII.] ON THE DYNAMICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 193 

which is in reality a simple consequence of the other expression 
for p. in terms of data with. reference to air. Remarks upon the 
determination of p. by such experiments, and by another class of 
experiments on air originated by Joule, are reserved for a sepa­
rate communication, which I hope to be able to make to the 
Royal Society on another occasion. [Dyn. Tkeory of Heat, below, 
Part IV. §§ 61-80.] 

31. The second of the expressions (H), in § 30 of my f01'D1er 
paper, or the equivalent expression (32), given below in the pre­
sent paper, shows that p. may be determined for any temperature 
from determinations for that temperature of-

(1) The rate of variation with the temperature, of the pres-
sure of saturated steam. • 

(2) The latent heat of a given weight of saturated steam. 

(3) The volume of a given weight of saturated steam. 

(4) The volume of a given weight of water. 

The last mentioned of these elements may, on account of the 
manner in which it enters the formula, be taken as constant, 
without producing any appreciable effect on the probable accu­
racy of the result. 

32. Regnault's observations have supplied the first of the 
data with very great accuracy for all temperatures between - 32' 
Cent. and 230'. 

33. As regards the second of the data, it must be remarked 
that all experimenters, from Watt, who first made experiments 
on the subject, to Regnault, whose determinations are the most 
accurate and extensive that have yet been made, appear to have 
either explicitly or tacitly assumed the same principle as that of 
Carnot which is overturned by the dynamical theory of heat; 
inasmuch as they have defined the ff total heat of steam" as the 
quantity of heat required, to convert a unit of weight of water 
at 0', into steam in the particular state considered. Thus Reg­
nault, setting out with this definition for "the total heat of satu­
rated steam," gives experimental determinations of it for the 
entire range of temperatures from O' to 230°; and he deduce!! the 

~ 13 
.' 

Digitized by Google 



194 ON THE DYNAMICAL THEORY OF HEAT. [XVLIII. 

"latent heat of saturated steam" at any temperature, from the 
.. total heat," 80 determined, by subtracting from it the quantity 
of heat necessary to raise the liquid to that temperature. Now, 
according to the dynamical theory, the quantity of heat expressed 
by the preceding definition depends on the manner (which may 
be infinitely varied) in which the specified change of state is 
effected; differing in different cases by the thermal equivalents of 
the differences of the external mechanical effect produced in the 
expansion. For instance, the total quantity of heat required to 
evaporate a quantity of water at 0°, and then, keeping it always 
in the state of saturated vapour·, bring it to the temperature 
100°, cannot be so much as three-fourths of the quantity required, 
first, to raise the temperature of the liquid to 100°, and then 
evaporate it at that temperature; 'and yet either -quantity is 
expressed by what is generally received as a definition of the 
"total heat" of the saturated vapour. To find what it is that is 
really determined as "total heat" of saturated steam in Regnault's 
researches, it is only necessary to remark, that the measurement 
actually made is of the quantity of heat emitted by a certain 
weight of water in passing through a calorimetrical apparatus, 
which it enters as saturated steam, and leaves in the liquid state, 
the result being reduced to what would have been found if the 
final temperature of the water had been exactly 0'. For there 
being no external mechanical effect produced (other than that of 
sound, which it is to be presumed is quite inappreciable), the only 
external effect is the emission of heat. This must, therefore, 
according to the fundamental proposition of the dynamical theory, 
be independent of the intermediate agencies. It follows that, 
however the steam may rush through the calorimeter, and at 
whatever reduced pressure it may actually be condensedt, the 

• See below (Part IlL § 58), where the "negative" specific heat of saturated 
steam is investigated. If the mean value of this quantity between ()O and 1()()o were 
--1'5 (and it cannot dift'er much from this) there would be 150 units of heat emitted 
by a pound of saturated vapour in having its temperature raised (by compression) 
from ()O to 1()()o. The latent heat of the vapour at oo being 606'6, the final 
quantity of heat required to convert a pound of water at ()O into saturated steam 
at l()()o, in the first of the ways mentionea in the text, would consequently be 456'6, 
which is only about l of the quantity 637 found as .. the total heat" of the saturated 
vapour at lOoo, by Regnault. 

t If the steam have to rush through a long fine tube, or through a small aper­
ture within the oalorimetrical apparatus, its pressure will be diminished before it is 

Digitized by Google 



XVLm.] ON THE DYNAMICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 195 

heat emitted externally must be exactly the same as if the con­
densation took place under the full pressure of the entering 
saturated steam; and we conclude that the total heat, as actually 
determined from his experiments by Regnault, is the quantity of 
heat that would be required, first to raise the liquid to the speci­
fied temperature, and then to evaporate it at that temperature; 
and that the principle on which he determines the latent heat is 
correct. Hence, through the range of his experiments, that 
is from 0° to 230°, w:e may consider the second of the data re­
quired for the calculation of II- as being supplied in a complete and 
satisfactory manner. 

34. There remains only the third of the data., or the volume 
of a given weight of saturated steam, for which accurate experi­
ments through an extensive range are wanting; and no experi­
mental researches bearing on the subject having been made since 
the time when my former paper was written, I see no reason for 
supposing that the values of II- which I then gave are not the 
most probable that can be obtained in the present state of science; 
and, on the understanding stated in § 33 of that paper, that 
accurate experimental determinations of the densities of saturated 
steam at different temperatures may indicate considerable errors 
in the densities which have been assumed according to the 
cc gaseous laws," and may consequently render considerable altera­
tions in my results necessary, I shall still continue to use Table I. 
condensed; aDd there will, therefore, in two partB of the calorimeter be saturated 
Iteam at dilIerent temperat1l1't!ll (as, for insuce, would be the case if Bteam from a 
high pl'888111'8 boUer were distilled into the opeD air); ye*, on accoUDt of the heat 
developed by the lluid friction, which would be precisely the equivalent of the 
meoh8Dical effect of the expanBion wasted in the rushing, the heat measured by the 
calorimeter would be precisely the same as if the condensation took place at a pres-
81U8 not appreciably lower than that of the entering steam. The oircumsuoea of 
such a case have been overlooked by ClausiuB (poggendodl's ,{ft'IIIJlell, 1850, No.4, 
p. 510), when he ezprealle8 with lOme doubt the opinion that the latent heat of 
saturated steam will be truly fOUDd from Regnault's "tcnal heat," by deduoting "the 
aenaible heat;" and gives as a realOn that, in the actual uperimentB, the condensation 
m1lllt have taken place .. UDder the same preamre, or nearly UDder the same prell-
11U'8," as the evaporation. The question is not, Did the condetuaticm fail plac, at 
/I wer Fun,., than that oJ the mtmng .team' but, Did Regnault mail the ,team 
work an mgim in palling t1rrough '''' calorimeter, or Will tMf'e '0 much fIOiIe oJ 
,team nuhing through it III to convert an appreciable porlicm oJ the total heat into 
uternt&l mechanical effect, And a negative &1lIIwer to this is a lIllffioient re&IIOn for 
adopting with cllrlainty the opinion that the prinoiple of his de*ermination of the 
latent heat is oorreoi. 

18-2 

Digitized by Google 



196 ON THE DYNAMICAL THEORY OF HEAT. [XLVlII. 

of that paper, which shows the values of II- for the temperatures 
I, 1 i, 21 ... 2301, or, the mean ~alues of II- for each of the 230 
successive Centrigrade degrees of the air-thermometer above the 
freezing-point, as the basis of numerical applications of the theory. 
It may be added, that any experimental researches sufficiently 
trustworthy in point of accuracy, yet to be made, either on air 
or any other substance, which may lead to values of II- differing 
from those, must be admitted as proving a discrepancy between 
the true densities of saturated steam, and those which have been 
assumed-. 

35. Table II. of my former paper, which shows the values of 

Jf0 ' p dt for t == 1, t = 2, t == 3, ... t = 231, renders the calculatI.o n of 

the mechanical effect derivable from a given quantity of heat by 
means of a perfect engine, with any given range included between 
the limits 0 and 231, extremely eusy; since the quantity to be 
divided by J t in the index of the exponential in the expression 
(8) will be found by subtracting the number in that table cor­
responding to the value of T, from that corresponding to the value 
ofB. 

36. The following tables show some numerical results which 
have been obtained in this way, with a few (contained in the 

lower part of the second table) calculated from values of J: pdt 

• I cannot see that any hypothesis, such as that adopted by Clausius funda· 
mentaJly in his investigations on this subject, and leading, as he shows to determi· 
nations of the densities of saturated steam at different temperatures, which indicate 
enormous deviations from the gaseous laws of variation with temperature and 
pressure, is more probable, or is probably nearer the truth, than that the density 
of saturated steam does follow these laws as it is usually assumed to do. In the 
present state of scienoe it would perhaps be wrong to say that either hypotheeis ia 
more probable than the other [or that the rigorous truth of either hypothesis is 
probable at all]. 

t It ought to be remarked, that as the unit of force implied in the determinations 
of II- is the weight of a pound of matter at Paris, and the unit of foroe in terms 
of which J is expressed is the weight of a pound at Manchester, these numbere 
ought in Btrictness to be modified 80 as to express the values in terms of a 
common unit of force; but as the force of gravity at Paris differe by leas than rJrns 
of its own value from the force of gravity at Manchester, this OOrrectiOD will 
be much les3 than the probable errors from other sources, and may therefore be 
negJectet1. 

Digitized by Google 



XLVIIL] ON THE DYNAJUC.A.L THEORY OJ' BEAT. 197 

estimated for temperatures above 230', roughly, according to 
the rate of variation of that function within the experimental 
limits. 

37. E:cplanatioo of tM Tablu. 

Column I. in each table shows the assumed ranges. 

Column II. shows ranges deduced by means of Table II. of 

the former paper, so that the 'Value of J; p.tlt for each may be the 

same as for the corresponding range shown in column I. 

Column III. shows what would be the duty of a unit of heat 
if Carnot's theory required no modification (or the actual duty 
of a unit of heat with additions through the range, to compensate 
for the quantities converted into mecha.nical effect). 

Column IV. shows the true duty of a unit of heat, and a com­
parison of the numbers in it with the corresponding numbers in 
column III. shows how much the true duty falls short of Carnot's 
theoretical duty in each case. 

Column VI. is calculated by the formula 

B - e -1:W J;pdt, 
where e - 2'71828, and for J;JUlt the successive values shown in 

column m. are used. 

Column IV. is calcula.ted by the formula 

W - 1390 (1 - B) 
from the values of 1 - B shown in column V. 

Digitized by Google 



198 ON THE DYNAMICAL THEORY OF HEAT. [XLVIII. 

38. Table of the Motive Power of Heat. 

IlL IV. VL 
Range of temperatureo. 

Duty of a unit DUt~ ofa unit Quanllty of heal 
ofhoat of eatlup- converted Into Quanllty of 

IL t"rough the plied from mllOllanical heal_~ 
wllol. rang.. tboeon... "!f,,d. 

B. T. s. Ii: w_ I-B. Bo 

0 0 0 ft.-IIIL 
1 0 31'08 SO 4'960 4-9,18 '00356 '99644 

10 0 40'86 80 48'987 48'1 '0346 '9654 
20 0 51-7 80 96'656 93'4 -067 '933 
80 0 62'6 80 148'06 186 -038 -902 
40 0 73'6 80 188-22 176 -127 -873 
60 0 84'5 80 232'18 214 '154 '846 
60 0 95'4 80 274'97 249 '821 
70 0 106'3 80 816'64 283 -796 
80 0 117'2 80 857-27 815 '227 -773 
90 0 128'0 80 896-93 345 '248 '752 

100 0 138'8 80 435'69 874 '269 '731 
110 0 149'1 80 473'62 401 -289 '711 
120 0 160'3 30 510'77 427 '308 '692 
130 0 171'0 30 547'21 452 '325 '675 
140 0 181-7 80 582'98 476 -343 '657 
150 0 192'3 30 618'14 499 -359 '641 
160 0 203'0 30 652'74 521 '37/) '625 
170 0 213-6 80 686'80 542 'S90 '610 
ISO 0 224'2 30 720-39 562 '596 
190 0 0 753-50 582 -418 '582 
200 0 200 0 786-17 600 '432 '568 
210 0 210 0 818'45 619 '~45 '555 
220 0 220 0 636 -457 '542 
230 0 2.'*0 0 87 653 '470 '530 

39, Supplementary of Motive Powers Heat, 

tIL V. 
of II!mporalunlL 

Duty of a unit Duty of a unll Quantity of heal Quanllty 0 
ofbesl ofheatlup- convorted Into boat 

I. IL through the plied from mechanical w. .~  
wholo nwge. .the source. clfect. 

S, T, S. T, r, .tit. W_ 1-.& it. 

0 0 0 0 ft.-l~ 
101-1 0 140 30 439'9 '271 '799 
105'8 0 280 100 446-2 382 '275 -725 
BOO 0 300 0 1099 757 '545 '465 
400 0 400 0 1395 879 '632 '368 
500 0 500 0 1690 979 '704 '296 
600 0 600 0 1980 1059 '762 '238 
a: 0 a: 0 at 1390 1-000 '000 

40, Taking the range 300 to 1400 as an example suitable to 
the circumstances of some the steam-engines that have 



XLYIII.] ON THE DYNAMICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 199 

been made (see Appendix to t< Account of Carnot's Theory," Sec. v.), 
we find in column III. of the supplementary table, 377 ft.-lbs. as 
the corresponding duty of a unit of heat instead of 440, shown in 
column III., which is Carnot's theoretical duty. 'Ve conclude 
that the recorded performance of the Fowey-Consols engine in 
1845, instead of being only 571 per cent. amounted really to 67 
per cent., or j of the duty of a perfect engine with the same range 
of temperature; and this duty being '2il (rather more than 1) 
of the whole e(luivalent of the heat used; we conclude further, 
that -Afl' or 18 per cent. of the whole heat supplied, was actually 
converted into mechanical effect by that steam-engine. 

41. The numbers in the lower part of the supplementary 
table show the great advantage that may be anticipated from the 
perfecting of the air-engine, or any other kind of thermo-dynamic 
engine in which the range of the temperature can be increa:;;ed 
much beyond the limits actually attainable in steam-engines. 
Thus an air-engine, with its hot part at GOO°, and its col(l part at 
O· Cent., working with perfect economy, would convert 76 per 
cent. of the whole heat used into mechanical effect; or working 
with such economy as has been estimated for the Fowey-Consols 
engine, that is, producing 67 per cent. of the theoretical duty 
corresponding to its range of temperature, would convert 51 per 
cent. of all the heat used into mechanical effect. [Note, of Dec. 30, 
1881. A great advance towards realizing this principle is now 
achieved in the gas-engine, of which the true dynamical economy 
is believed to be already superior to that of the best modern COlU­

pound steam-engine.] 
42. It was suggested to me by Mr Joule, in a letter dated 

December 9, 1!:H~, that the true mlue of p. might be "inYersely 
as the temperatures from zero *;" and values for ,'arious tempe­
ratures calculated by means of the formula, 

E 
p. = J 1+ 1'( .. ···· ............ · ...... (11), 

E 
• If we take p. =- k 1-+ Et where k may be any constant, we find 

W=J(~-!\~; 
£+8) 

which is the formula. I gave when this paper was communicated. I ha,c sincc 
remarked, tha.t Mr Joule's hypothesis implieS essentially that the coefficient k mu~t 

Digitized by Google 



200 ON THE DYNAlIICAL THEORY OF HEAT. [XLvm. 

were given for comparison with those which I had calculate<l from 
data regarding st~m. This formula is also adopted by Clausius, 
who uses it fundamentally in bis mathematical investigations. 
I{ II- were correctly expressed by it, we should have 

fs 1 + ES 
I'II-dt = Jlog 1 + ET; 

and therefore equations (1) and (2) would become 
S-T 

W = J r-........................... (12), 
}]+S 

!+T 
E 

B =~ .............................. (13). 
E+ S 

403. The reasons upon which 'Mr Joule's opinion is founded, 
that the preceding equation (11) may be the correct expression for 
Carnot's function, although the values calculated by means of it 
differ considerably from those shown in Table I. of my former 
paper, form the subject of a communication which I hope to have 
an opportunity of laying before the Royal Society previously to 
the close of the present session. [part IV. §§ 61-80, below.] 

PART III. 

Applicat:i0n8 of tke Dynamical Theory to establish RelatiOflll 
between the Physical Properties of all Bubsta.ncea. 

4040. The two fundamental equations of the dynamical theory 
of heat, investigated above, express relations between quantities 
of heat required to produce changes of volume and tempera.ture in 
any material medium whatever, subjected to a uniform pressure in 
all directions, which lead to various remarkable conclusions. Such 

be as it is taken in the text, the mechanical equivalent of a thermal nnit. Hr 
Bankine, in a letter dated March 27, 1851, informs me that he haa deduoed, from 
the principles laid down in his paper oommunioated last- year to thiB Society, an 
approximate formula for the ratio of the maximum quantity of heat converted into 
mechanical eIIect to the whole quantity expended, in an expansive engine of any 
lubatance, which, on oomparison, I find agrees exactly with the expreeaion (12) 
Biven in the text as a ooDBequence of the hypothesis II1lgR8IIted by Hr loule regarding 
ihe value of,.,. at any temperature.-[April 4, 1861.] 

Digitized by Google 



nVDI.] ON THE DYN.lJOCAL THEORY OF HEAT. 201 

of these as are independent of Joule's principle (expressed by 
equation (2) of § 20), being also independent of the truth or 
falseness of Carnot's contrary assumption regarding the perma­
nence of heat, are common to his theory and to the dynamical 
theory; and some of the most important of them - have been 
given by Carnot himself, and other writers who adopted his 
principles and mode of reasoning without modification. Other 
remarkable conclusions on the same subject might have been 

. dM aN 
drawn from the equation dt - dv = 0, expressing Carnot's as-

sumption (of the truth of which experimental tests might have 
been thus suggested); but I am not aware that any conclusion 
deducible from it, not included in Carnot's expression for the 
motive power of heat through finite ranges of temperature, has yet 
been actually obtained and published. 

45. The recent writings of Rankine and Clausius contain 
some of the consequences of the fundamental principle of the 
dynamical theory (expressed in the first fundamental proposition 
above) regarding physical properties of various substances; among 
which may be mentioned especially a very remarkable discovery 
regarding the s~ific heat of saturated steam (investigated also in 
this paper in § 58 below), made independently by the two authors, 
and a property of water at its freezing-point, deduced from the 
corresponding investigation regarding ice and water under pressure 
by Clausius; according to which he finds that, for each n° Cent. I ('" 
that the solidifying point of water is lowered by pressure, its ~'';. 
latent heat, which under atmospheric pressure is 79, is diminished ;','" , ' 
by '081. The investigations of both these writers involve funda- '_-
mentally various hypotheses which may be or may not be found ... 
by experiment to be approximately true; and which render it 
difficult to gather from their writings what part of their conclu-
sions, especially with reference to air and gases, depend merely on ... 
the necessary principles of the dynamical theory. 

46. In the remainder of this paper, the two fundamental .. . 
propositions, expressed by the equations 

dM dN 1 dp 
([t- dv =J at········ .. ····(2) of§ 20, 'r' 

• See above, § 22. (y' 

Digitized by Google 



202 ON THE DYNAMICAL THEORY OF HEAT. [XLVIII. 

and 1 dp 
It[ = p. . cft .. ................. (3) of § 21, 

are applied to establish properties of the specific heats of any 
substance whatever; and then special conclusions are deduced for 
the case of a fluid following strictly the" gaseous laws" of density, 
and for the case of a medium consisting of parts in different states 
at the same temperature, as water and saturated steam, or ice and 
'vater. 

47. In the first place it may be remarked, that by the defi­
nition of .11 and .LY in § 20, .N must be what is commonly called 
the" specific heat at constant volume" of the substance, provided 
the quantity of the medium be the standard quantity adopted for 
specific heats, which, in all that follows, I shall take as the unit of 
weight. Hence the fundamental equation of the dynamical 
theory, (2) of § 20, expresses a relation between this specific heat 
and the quantities for the particular substance denoted by .A[ and 
p. If we eliminate M from this equation, by means of equation 
(3) of § 21, derived from the expression of the second fundamental 
principle of the theory of the motive power of heat, we find 

which expresses a relation between the variation in the specific 
heat at constant volulIle, of any substance, produced by an altera­
tion of its volume at a constant temperature, aud the variation of 
its pressure with its temperature when the yolume is constant; 
involving a function, /1-, of the temperature, which is the same for 
all substances. 

48. Again, let K denote the specific heat of the substance 
under constant pressure. Then, if dv and dt be so related that 
the pressure of the medium, when its volume and temperature 
are v + dv and t + dt respectively, is the same as when they are 
v and t, that is, if 

a ' 
0= 1> dv + ap dt· 

dv dt' 
we have 

Kelt = Jldt: + }Mt. 

Digitized by Google 



XLvm.] ON THE DYNAJUCAL THEORY OF HEAT. 203 

Hence we find 
dp 

- d" 
M = -;r:p (K -N). ................... (15). 

dt 

which merely shows the meaning in terms of the two specific 
heats. of what I have denoted by M. Using in this for M its 
value given by (3) of § 21, we find 

(~~r 
K -N = d ..................... (16), 

IL x _f!!! 
,.. d" 

an expression for the difference between the two specific heats, 
derived without hypothesis from the second fundamental principle 
of the theory of the motive power of heat. 

49. These results may be put into forms more convenient for 
use. in applications to liquid and solid media, by introducing 
the notation:-

"=,,_x_1d:P; } ..................... ..... (17), 
e-~ di 

where " will be the reciprocal of the compressibility, and e the 
coefficient of expansion with heat. 

Equations (14), (16) and (3), thus become 

dN d ('~e) lee 
d" = -T - J .... .................. (18), 

K -N='IJlee-' ........................(19), 
P-

M=I- .1C6 ...........................(20); 
p. 

the third of these equations being annexed to show explicitly the 
quantity of heat developed by the compression of the substance 
kept at a constant temperature. Lastly, if (J denote the rise in 

, 
Digitized by Google 



204. ON THE DYNAMICAL THEORY OF HUT. [XLVIII. 

temperature produced by a compression from v + dv to v before 
any heat is emitted, we have 

1 ICe ICe 
6 =N',.-,. ' dv = ,.,. K - vICe .dv. ............ (21}. 

50. The first of these expressions for 6 shows that, when the 
substance contracts as its temperature rises (as is the case, for 
instance, with water between its freezing-point and its point of 
maximum density), its temperature would become lowered by a 
sudden compression. The second, which shows in terms of its 
compressibility and expansibility exactly how much the tempe­
rature of any substance is altered by an infinitely small alteration 
of its volume, leads to the approximate expression 

ICe 
6=,.,.K' 

if, as is probably the case, for all known solids and liquids, e be so 
small that e • vlte is very small compared with ,.,.K. 

51. If, now, we suppose the substance to be a gas, and intro­
duce the hypothesis that its density is strictly subject to the 
"gaseous laws," we should have, by Boyle and Mariotte's law of 
compression, 

d:dP = - E ........................... (22); 
v v . 

and by Dalton and Gay-Lussac's law of expansion, 
dv Ev 
dt = 1 +Ef·························(23); 

from which we deduce 
dp Ep 
dt=l+Et· 

Equation (14) will consequently become 

d{ Ep E} 
dN,.,.(1 +Et) - J . 
dv = dt ••••••••••••..•..... (24), 

a result peculiar to the dynamical theory and equation (16), 
E'pv 

K-N= ,.,.(I,_.. Et). ........................ (25}, 

which agrees with the result of § 53 of my former paper. 

Digitized by Google 



XLVIII.] ON THE DYNAMICAL THEORY OF BEAT. 205 

If V be taken to denote the volume of the gas at the tempe­
rature 0° under unity of pressure, (25) becomes 

E'V 
K - N = #,(1 +Et) ...................... (26). 

52. All the conclusions obtained by Clausius, with reference 
to air or gases, are obtained immediately from these equations 
by taking 

E 
#,=J 1 +Et' 

which will make ~~ = 0, and by assuming, as he does, that N, thus 

found to be independent of the density of the gas, is also inde­
pendent of its temperature. 

53. As a last application of the two fundamental equations of 
the theory, let the medium with reference to which M and N are 
defined consist of a weight 1 -:c of a certain substance in one 
state, and a weight :c in another state at the same temperature, 
containing more latent heat. To avoid circumlocution and to fi~ 
the ideas, in what follows we may suppose the former state to be 
liquid and the latter gaseous; but the investigation, as will be 
seen, is equally applicable to the case of a solid in contact with the 
same substance in the liquid or gaseous form. 

54. The volume and temperature of the whole medium being, 
as before, denoted respectively by " and t, we shall have 

A. (1 -:c) + ')':C = tJ ........................ (27), 

if A. and ')' be the volumes of unity of weight of the substance in 
the liquid and the gaseous states respectively: and p, the pressure, 
may be considered as a function of t, depending solely on the 
nature of the substance. To express Maud N for this mixed 
medium, let L denote the latent heat of a unit of weight of the 
vapour, c the specific heat of the liquid, and h the specific heat of 
the vapour when kept in a state of saturation. We shall have 

- ~ - . 
d:c 

Mdv=L dvdv. 

Ndt = c (1 -:c.)  dt + htcdt + L ~d··t~  df. 

. / 
Digitized by Google 



206 ON THE DYNAMICA.L THEORY OF HEA.T. [XLVIII. 

Now, by (27), we have 
dx 

("1- x) dv = 1.. ...................... (28), 

dx dA d"( 
and ("I - X) dt + (I-x) dt +x dt = 0 ............. (29). 

L 
Hence M=-" ........................... (30), 

"(-'" 

dA d'Y 
(I-x) dt + xCii 

N= c(l-x)+hx-L .........(31). 
,,(-X 

an. The expression of tlJe second fundamental proposition in 
this case becomes, consequently, 

rip 
("I - X) - -

p. = L dt ......................... (32), 

which agrees with Camot's original result, and is the formula that 
has been u8eJ (referred to above in § 31) for determining p. by 
means of Regnault's observations on steam. 

56. To express the conclusion derivable from the first funda­
mental proposition, we have, by differentiating the preceding 
expressions for j[ and N with reference to t anJ v respectively, 

v 

_{ It - c L} d(" I - X) 
- "I-X - ("(-X)' ---aT-' 

Hence equation (2) of § 20 becomes 

dL 
di+ c - h 1 d 

"( _ X - J a~ .... ·. . ·. ... ·. ..... ·· .. (33). Un 
I'~ 

".II~ v.--.. 

Digitized by Google 



XLVlIL] ON mE DYXAlIICAL THEORY OF BEAT. !O7 

Combining this with the conclusion (32) derived from the 
second fundamental proposition. we obtain 

dL Lp. 
dt +c-h= 7··························(34). 

The former of these equations agrees precisely with one which 
was first given by Clausius, and the preceding investigation is 
substantially the same as the investigation by which he arrived at 
it. The second differs from another given by Clausius only in not 
implying any hypothesis as to the form of Carnot's function p.. 

5;. If we suppose p. and L to be known for any tempemture, 

equation (32) enables us to determine the value of : for that 

tempemture j and thence deducing a value of dl, we have 

dt= 7p-..L~  dp .•.•.••.•...•.•......••.. (3:-»j 

which shows the effect of pressure in altering the co boiling-point .. 
if the mixed medium be a liquid and its vapour, or the melting­
point if it be a solid in contact with the same substance ip the 
liquid state. This agrees with the conclusion arrived at [see 
pp. 156-164 above] by my elder brother in his "Theoretical 
Investigation of the Effect of Pressure in Lowering the Freezing­
Point of Water." His result, obtained by taking as the value for p. 
that derived from Table I. of my former paper for the tempemtun~ 
0', is. that the freezing-point is lowered by '0075° Cent. by an 
additional atmosphere of pressure. Clausius, with the other data 
the same, obtains '00733° as the lowering of tempemture by the 
same additional pressure, which differs from my brother's result 
only from having been calculated from a formula which implies 

the hypothetical expression J 1 .:E t for p.. It was by applying 

equation (33) to determine ~; for the same case that Clausius 

arrived at the curious result regarding the latent heat of water 
under pressure mentioned above (§ 45). 

58. Lastly, it may. be remarked that every quantity which 
appears in equation (33), except h, is known with tolemble ac-

/ 

Digitized by Google 



208 ON THE DYNllIICAL THEORY OF HEAT, [XLVIll, 

curacy for saturated steam through a wide range of temperature; 
and we may therefore use this equation to find h, which has 
never yet been made an object of experimental research, Thus 
we have 

- h=  'Y JA  1e - (d; + c). 
For the value of 'Y the best data regarding the density of 

saturated steam that can be had must be taken, If for different 
temperatures we use the same values for the density of saturated 
steam (calculated according to the gaseous laws, and Regnault's 
observed pressure from U!"6' taken as the density at 100'), the 
values obtained for the first term of the second member of the 
preceding equation are the same as if we take the form 

-h=LpJ. - (dCLIt  +c')  
derived from (34), and use the values of p. shown in Table I. of 
my former paper, The values of - h in the second column in the 
following table have been so calculated, with, besides, the follow­
ing data afforded by Regnault from his observations on the total 
heat of steam, and the specific heat of water 

ddLt  + c 30. 
=' ;), 

L = 606'5 + '305t - ('00002t' + 'OOOOOOt'), • -. (!) 
The values of - h shown in the third column are those derived 
by Clausius from an equation which is the same as what (34) 

would become if J 1 : Et were substituted for p.. 

-/a accordiDg to Tabl" 
t. I, of" Accounl of -/a accordiDg to 

Carnol'. Tbeo..,.," (''laualul. 

0 1'868 1'916 
50 1'479 1'465 

100 1'174 1'133 
150 0'951 0'879 
200 0'780 0'676 

59. From these results it appears, that through the whole 
range of temperatures at which observations have been made, the 

Digitized by Google 



XLVIII.] ON THE DYNAlIICAL THEORY OF HEAT. 209 

value of " is negative; and, therefore, if a quantity of saturated 
vapour be compressed in a vessel containing no liquid water, heat 
must be continuously abstracted from it in order that it may 
remain saturated as its temperature rises; and conversely, if a 
quantity of saturated vapour be allowed to expand in a closed 
vessel, heat must be supplied to it to prevent any part of it from 
becoming condensed into the liquid form as the temperature of the 
whole sinks. This very remarkable conclusion was first announced 
by Mr Rankine, in his paper communicated to this Society on the 
4th of Februaty last year. It was discovered independently by 
Clausius, and published in his paper in Poggendorft"s Annalen in 
the months of April and May of the same year. 

60. It might appear at first sight, that the well-known fact 
that steam rushing from a high-pressure boiler through a small 
orifice into the open air does not scald a hand exposed to it-, is 
inconsistent with the proposition, tha.t steam expanding from a 
state of saturation must ha.ve heat given to it to prevent any part 
from becoming condensed; since the steam would scald the hand 
unless it were dry, and consequently above the boiling-point in 
temperature. The explanation of this apparent difficulty, given 
in a letter which I wrote to Mr Joule last October [Art. XLVII. 
above], and which has since been published in the Philosophical 
Magazine, is, that the steam in rushing through the orifice pro­
duces mechanical effect which is immediately wasted in fluid 
friction, and consequently reconverted into heat; so that the 
issuing steam at the atmospheric pressure would have to part 
with as much heat to convert it into water at the temperature 
100° as it would have had to part with to have been condensed 
at the high pressure and then cooled down to 100°, which for a 

[. Nou added Jum 26, 1862, in Phil. Mag. rtprjnt.-At present I am inclined to 
believe that 'he rapidity of the ourrent ueroiaes a great inlluen08 on the sensation 

• experienced in the ciro1lIllBtances, by caWling the 8team to mix with the 8urrounding 
air; for I haTe found that the hand 8dem pain when exposed to the 8team iBBUing 
from a common kettle, and dried by paBBing through a copper tube 8urrounded by 
red·hot coals or heated by lamp8. But although there may be uncertainty regarding 
the causes of the different 88Dsations in the di1ferent oiro1lIllBtances, I believe there 
is no reason for doubting either the fact of the drynes8 of the 8team i88uing from 
a higb.preB8111'8 boiler (U08pt when there i8 "priming" to a considerable extent), 
or the COrrectn088 of the explanation of ibis fact which I have given in the letter 
referred to.] 

T. 

DigilizedbyGoogle ,. 



210 ON THE DYNAMICAL THEORY OF HEAT. [XLVIII. 

pound of steam initially saturated at the temperature t is, by 
Regnault's modification of Watt's law, ·:305 (t-1000) more heat 
than a pound of saturated stearn at 100° would have to part with 
to be reduced to the same state j and the issuing steam must 
therefore be above 100° in temperature, and dry. 

PART IV. 

[Xote of Dec. 30, 1881. The experimental method suggested 
in this Article, was carried out practically by Mr Joule and the 
author in successive years from 1852 to IR5G. Extracts from 
their joint papers describing their work are included below [Art. 
XLIX.] in the prescnt reprint.] 

On a ~l[etllOd (1 discot·ering e:rperimelltally tlte Relation between 
tlte J.1Jeclwnical JVork spent, alld the Heat produced by tlte 
Compressiun of a Gaseous Fluid-. 

Gl. The important researches of Joule on the thermal cir­
cumstances connected with the expansion and compression of air, 
and the allmirable reasoning upon them expressed in his papert 
"On the Cllullges of Temperature pruduct'd by thc Rarefaction 
and COlllll'w,utiun of Air," especially the way in which he takes 
into aCl'Iltlllt allY mechanical effect tlw.t lIlay be C'xternally pro­
duced, or interually lost, in fluid friction, ha\'e illtroduced an 
entirely new method of treating <}l1e:,tiolls reganling the physical 
properties of flui.k The olUect of the pre5('nt paper is to show 
how, by the use lIf this new metlwd, in clinnexion with the princi­
ples explained in my preC'eding paper, a cOlllplete theoretical "iew 
may be ubtained uf the phellomcna experimented on by Joule; 
and to point out sOllie of the objcets to Le attainell by a cuntinua­
tion and extension (.f his experimelltal researches. 

(;2. The Appendix to my "AcC'onnt uf Carnot's Theory"~ con­
tains a theoretical in\'('stigati"n (If the heat den·loped by the 

* From the Tr,lII.'llctiolls of the n"yal Sot"i~t!l of EdiIlUllr[llt, Yo!. XlI:. part 2. 
April 17, 18:;1. 

t l>hi/usophi""l .11"[1(/:;'1<', ~ay, IB45. Yo\. un. p. 309. 

Digitized by Google